Content



Western Union PR Final.pdf142.99 KB


Contact
Steve Hudak, 703-905-3770



Immediate Release
January 19, 2017


Company Agrees to $184 Million Penalty and Remedial Actions


Washington, D.C. – The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has assessed a $184 million civil money penalty today against Western Union Financial Services, Inc. (WUFSI). WUFSI consented to FinCEN’s determination that prior to 2012, WUFSI willfully violated the Bank Secrecy Act’s anti-money laundering (AML) requirements by failing to implement and maintain an effective, risk-based AML program and by failing to file timely suspicious activity reports (SARs).  FinCEN’s penalty is in conjunction with actions by the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC). 
“This consent agreement with Western Union reflects that company’s recognition of past shortcomings and the damage that can be done when there is a failure of a culture of compliance,” said FinCEN Acting Director Jamal El-Hindi.  “Money transmitters, large and small, play a critical role in the movement of legitimate funds around that world, and they also are of vital assistance to FinCEN and law enforcement in thwarting illicit activity. As such, it is imperative that they maintain appropriate safeguards to keep illicit actors from abusing their products, and take to heart that not all business is good business.”
Collectively, WUFSI businesses comprise a network of approximately 500,000 agent locations in 200 countries and territories worldwide.  U.S. AML rules require WUFSI, as a money services business, to have an effective AML program in place to prevent the company from being used to facilitate money laundering and the financing of terrorism.  As part of their AML program, WUFSI needed to take reasonable steps to guard against the flow of illicit funds, including through its relationships with foreign agents and outlets.  WUFSI violated this requirement by failing to conduct adequate due diligence (such as background checks and on-site reviews) on a  number of its new agents and failing to conduct enhanced due diligence on certain Latin America-based agent locations.  As a result of WUFSI’s willful AML violations, certain agent locations and outlets that WUFSI suspected were involved in fraud and money laundering were able to continue to use WUFSI’s money transfer system to facilitate their illicit activity.    
WUFSI used master agents along the U.S. southwest border with Mexico who would contract with subagents to deliver funds to recipients in Mexico (this model is known as the “Master Agent” model or “Master Payee” model).  WUFSI failed to conduct or ensure that its master agents conducted onsite reviews of a number of these subagents.  Despite its knowledge of the money laundering risks and the use of remittances to send narcotics proceeds to Mexico, WUFSI failed to collect sufficient information on the identity of its Mexican-based subagents.  This prevented WUFSI from monitoring these agents to ensure that they were properly identifying the person obtaining money in Mexico.
WUFSI also failed to develop and implement policies and procedures that could be reasonably expected to detect and cause the reporting of suspicious transactions that led to unreasonable delay in filing thousands of SARs.  The Bank Secrecy Act requires WUFSI to report transactions that it “knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect” are suspicious in SARs.  Like other BSA filings, SARs play an important role in detecting possible criminal activity.  FinCEN and law enforcement use SARs to, among other things, investigate money laundering, terrorist financing, and other serious criminal activity.  Before 2012, in many cases, WUFSI took over 90 days to file on activity for which it had facts to constitute the basis for filing a SAR.  Additionally, although WUFSI filed thousands of SARs on customers of its agent locations, it rarely filed SARs on its agent locations.  WUFSI’s practice was not to identify agent locations as “subjects” of SARs unless it found the agent location to be complicit.  WUFSI typically only found an agent to be complicit if the agent was arrested, publicly identified to be implicated in illicit transactions, or if WUFSI’s own investigation determined that the agent location was complicit.  By not filing these SARs in a timely manner, WUFSI unnecessarily delayed reporting information that is critical for the U.S. government to detect and prevent illicit finance.
FinCEN’s $184 million civil money penalty is based on WUFSI’s AML program failures and violations of its SAR filing obligations.  Pursuant to the terms of the settlement agreement, FinCEN will deem its penalty fully satisfied by WUFSI’s payment to the DOJ pursuant to the forfeiture order of $586 million for the victims of fraud.  WUFSI has also agreed to a number of remedial undertakings including increased scrutiny and periodic reporting regarding agent SAR reporting and disclosure of corrective actions taken against agents.  FinCEN recognizes and extends its thanks to the many state partners for their contributions to our investigation and to the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission for their partnership with FinCEN in coordinating this matter. 


Financial Institution

Money Services Businesses




Content



ISF News Release Final.pdf135.97 KB


Contact
Steve Hudak, 703-905-3770



Immediate Release
December 14, 2016




WASHINGTON, DC – The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) hosted the third annual International Supervisors Forum (ISF) last week. The ISF was established in 2013 by similar government regulatory agencies from the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand to address issues pertaining to anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) and other financial crimes, as well as strengthen domestic and international compliance and supervisory regimes.
As part of their cooperation, representatives of FinCEN and the other ISF agencies met with senior executives of three major international money services businesses (MSBs)—Western Union, MoneyGram and Ria—which conduct business in each of the ISF countries.  Discussions centered on the ISF’s role and initiatives, transnational threats, information sharing, and the creation of an ongoing dialogue on prevalent compliance matters. 
“Sharing information with our international regulatory peers, and engaging with international financial institutions are obvious and important steps to pursue,” said FinCEN Acting Director Jamal El-Hindi. “The better we coordinate our public and private sector efforts to combat international financial criminals, the safer the global financial system will be.”
Transnational efforts are essential to managing the continuing and changing threats posed by international money laundering and terrorist finance networks. ISF members have been formalizing agreements that will allow for information to be shared on a consistent basis. As a result, ISF members are working with their respective law enforcement agencies to share operational practices, methodologies, training, and to leverage resources to strengthen the international AML/CFT community.
ISF members regulate a significant number of MSB entities that have a presence in some or all of the members’ jurisdictions. Moving forward, the ISF will work to coordinate compliance and enforcement activities on entities within the MSB industry.
###


Financial Institution

Money Services Businesses




Content



Advisory Information



advissu4.pdf105.91 KB

Issue 4

Issued Date
August 01, 1996



Subject
FATF-VII Report on Money Laundering Typologies




FinCEN Advisory
This advisory is provided to alert recipients to known or suspected money laundering schemes reported by members of the Financial Action Task Force.
The new era of financial globalization is altering the roles of thefinancial, regulatory and law enforcement communities—they must now work closely together to combat money laundering.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF), created by the G-7, is an international organization comprised of representatives of the financial,regulatory and law enforcement communities from 26 nationsaround the world, the European Commission and the Gulf CooperationCouncil. It serves as the world leader in promoting the developmentof effective anti-money laundering controls and cooperation incounter-money laundering investigations among its membership and around the globe.
In June, FATF revised its standards for countries to follow in combating the laundering of criminal proceeds. These standards are known as the 40 Recommendations. In addition to the revised 40 Recommendations, FATF also disseminated the results of a "typologiesexercise" which highlights new money laundering methods and patterns of activities used by criminals.
In keeping with FinCEN’s role as an information sharing network to assist the financial, regulatory and law enforcement communitiesin combating money laundering and other financial crimes, we are disseminating the attached FATF-VII Report on Money LaunderingTypologies. We are providing this information to alert you to the variety of techniques and the changing methods being used by money launderers around the world.
For more information about FATF and its efforts to address the problem of money laundering, please visit the FinCEN web site at http://www.ustreas.gov/treasury/bureaus/fincen.
We hope that you will find this information useful.
Stanley E. Morris
Director
 
 
FinCEN Advisory is a product of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,Department of the Treasury, Post Office Box 39, Vienna, Virginia 22183.For more information about FinCEN’s programs, visit the FinCEN web site at https://www.fincen.gov. General questions or comments regarding FinCEN publications should be addressed to the Office of Communications, FinCEN, (703) 905-3773.Information may also be faxed to (703) 905-3885.
 
 
 
Attachment:
 
 
 
FATF-VIIANNEX 3
28 June 1996
 

FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE ON
			MONEY LAUNDERING
			FATF-VII REPORT ON MONEY LAUNDERING
			TYPOLOGIES

 
 
FATF-VII REPORT ON MONEY LAUNDERING TYPOLOGIES
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The group of experts met in Paris on 28-29 November 1995 under the chairmanship of Mr. JeanSpreutels, President, Cellule de Traitement des Informations Financières (CTIF), Belgium. The group included representatives from FATF members Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Experts from non-member, observer organisations Interpol and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) werepresent as well.
2. The purpose of the 1995/1996 “typologies exercise” was to provide a forum for law enforcementexperts — those primarily tasked with combating money laundering — to discuss recent trends in thecleansing of criminal proceeds, emerging threats, and effective countermeasures. While the discussions focused principally on money laundering developments in FATF member nations, the experts also sought to pool available information on prevailing laundering patterns in non-member countries or regions. In this vein, the disposal of illicit funds by interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc was accorded significant attention.
3. In a departure from the previous session, distinct segments of the 1995/1996 typologies exercisewere devoted to reviewing available information on money laundering in the securities and insuranceindustries. These subjects were built into the 1995/1996 agenda in an effort to flesh out evidence,surfacing during the 1994/1995 experts session, which suggested that money launderers were using these sectors to ply their trade. To facilitate the dialogue, members were invited to include in their delegationsexperts from the insurance and securities industries.
 
II. MAGNITUDE AND GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE OF THE MONEY LAUNDERING PROBLEM
4. It was agreed that as part of their advance preparation for the meeting, the experts would endeavour to determine the amount of money laundering occurring in their countries, with a view toward arriving at an estimate for all FATF members. Some members were able to produce an estimate based on narcotics seizures in their jurisdiction, in accordance with a method the FATF had used in 1990 (SeeFATF-I Report).
5. Unfortunately, the vast majority of members lack sufficient data to support credible estimates.Several experts identified as the best available evidence statistics regarding the number of suspicious transaction reports filed in their countries and the amounts involved in those transactions. As some acknowledged, however, it would be difficult to formulate a projection based on this information. The mere registering of a report of suspicious activity does not necessarily establish that money laundering has in fact occurred. While some members were able to establish with certainty the link between suspicious transaction reports and criminal activity, they generally were able to do so for only a portion of the reports they had received. Moreover, it was assumed that suspicious transactions reports do not account for all instances of money laundering.
6. Other experts offered data on sums seized pursuant to money laundering investigations orprosecutions. This information too does not appear to support a valid estimate of the amount of tainted funds entering the legitimate financial stream, as one member’s experience demonstrates. One of the law enforcement agencies in this country reported that the aggregate volume of assets seized within its borders is decreasing, while other agencies detected higher levels of money laundering activity.
7. A few experts cited figures representing deposits or investments from countries known to be bases of operations for significant criminal enterprises. Representatives from one member, for example, estimated an influx of between $ US 40-50 million from interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. Again, these numbers cannot sustain a defensible estimate of laundered funds. In most cases, authorities have not been able to confirm that the funds were of illegal origin.
8. Despite the difficulties attendant to calculating the size of the money laundering problem, the experts favoured pressing forward with attempts to do so. They agreed that a statistically significant estimate would provide a wealth of information for the FATF, member governments, and the private sector.
9. One delegation introduced the results of a recently conducted study measuring the scope of itsmoney laundering problem. The study included a review of official crime statistics, as well as anecdotal evidence based on expert opinion. It projected the amount of money laundered in this country to be approximately $ US 4.55 billion per year. The experts determined to review the methodology employed in the study to determine whether it can be translated into a broader examination of the money laundering problem within the FATF, or even globally.
 
III. RECENT TRENDS AMONG FATF MEMBERS
A. The Principal Sources of Illegal Proceeds
10. Drug trafficking and financial crime (bank fraud, credit card fraud, investment fraud, advance feefraud, embezzlement and the like) remain the most frequently mentioned sources of illegal proceeds. Onthe whole, drug trafficking is still considered the largest single generator of tainted funds, but the scale of laundering linked to financial crime is growing rapidly. In fact, some Scandinavian members reported vastly greater levels of illicit profits stemming from financial crime than from narcotics.
11. Organised crime continues to be responsible for a large proportion of the dirty money flowing through financial channels. The Italian Mafia, the Japanese yakuza, the Colombian cartels, Russian andEastern European criminal enterprises, American ethnic gangs, and other, similarly structured groups are involved in a wide range of criminal activities. In addition to drug trafficking, these enterprises generate funds from loan sharking, illegal gambling, fraud, embezzlement, extortion, prostitution, illegal trafficking in arms and human beings, and a host of other offences. Frequently, they maintain extensive holdings in legitimate businesses which can be manipulated both to cloak and to invest illegally generated funds.
B. Prevailing Trends and Emerging Threats in Money Laundering
12. Two general observations can be made regarding current money laundering trends which cutacross the FATF membership. First, certain traditional money laundering techniques remain preferred avenues for hiding ill-gotten wealth. Second, beyond conventional laundering techniques, the expertshave become alert to new developments occurring in the financial sector which may present significant money laundering threats.
(i) Traditional Laundering Techniques: Banking Sector
13. As they have been historically, banks remain an important mechanism for the disposal of criminal proceeds. The experts reported a number of patterns of activity indicative of laundering in the banking sector.
14. One such pattern is the use of accounts in false names, or in the name of persons or interests operating on behalf of other beneficiaries. The latter category includes a class of money laundering agents such as solicitors, attorneys and accountants (a theme discussed more fully in Paragraph 25below). It also includes shell or front companies. In all cases, the accounts are utilised to facilitate the deposit or transfer of illicit funds. Often, there are complex layers of transactions involving multiple accounts in the names of multiple persons, businesses or shell companies.
15. The experts noted several characteristics probative of laundering through such accounts. Forexample, transaction activity in the accounts often occurs in amounts greater than that which ordinarily would be expected given the purported nature of the account holder’s business. In addition,documentation offered to support transactions, such as loan agreements, guarantees, purchase or salecontracts, and letters of credit, often appears false or legally deficient. If the account holder is a business, the business frequently has been incorporated or registered with the local chamber of commerce for only a short period of time. And in many cases, the parties on both sides of the transactions appear to be related. Indeed, the parties may even be the same. These trends have been particularly apparent in accounts opened and maintained by persons or concerns tied to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
16. Another trend identified by some delegations is the use of representative offices of foreign banks to dispose of criminal proceeds. Representative offices may offer an important advantage to money launderers. In some countries, though not all, representative offices can accept deposits and then transfer the funds to their own accounts with a local bank, without disclosing the identities of the depositors and beneficiaries.
17. In addition to the typologies outlined above, other familiar laundering techniques continue to figure prominently in the banking sector. Wire transfers remain a primary tool at all stages of thelaundering process. Transactions are still structured, even when there are no large cash reporting requirements. And large cash deposits are still being made in some areas, especially by persons and interests connected to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
(ii) Traditional Laundering Techniques: Non-Banking Sector1
18. Non-bank financial institutions and non-financial businesses are still attractive avenues for introducing ill-gotten gains into regular financial channels. Some delegations continue to report asignificant shift in laundering activity from the traditional banking sector to the non-bank financial sector and to non-financial businesses and professions.
19. Bureaux de change pose an increasing money laundering threat. The experts cited an apparent marked increase in the number and volume of transactions conducted through these entities, and acommensurate rise in actual or suspected laundering activity. The criminal element continues to be attracted to bureaux de change because they tend not to be as heavily regulated as banks and other traditional financial institutions — if they are regulated at all.
20. Another important trend has been the rise of a class of professional money laundering facilitators. The experts report an increase in the number of solicitors, attorneys, accountants, financial advisors, notaries and other fiduciaries whose services are employed to assist in the disposal of criminal profits. Among the more common tactics observed have been the use of solicitors’ or attorneys’ client accounts for the placement and layering of funds. This method offers the launderer the anonymity of the solicitor-client privilege.
21. Other ploys include the establishment of shell corporations, trusts or partnerships by attorneys,accountants and other professionals. Working through these business entities, the professionals spin webs of intricate transactions to mask the origin of criminally derived funds and to conceal the identities of the parties and beneficiaries. In many cases, the professionals will act as directors, trustees, or partners in these transactions, or they will supply nominal directors, trustees, or partners.
22. One of the oldest money laundering techniques, common smuggling, appears to be on the rise.A number of experts reported an appreciable increase in the amount of cash moving covertly acrossborders. Smuggling can occur by physically transporting currency or monetary instruments, or by hidingthe cash in outbound cargo shipments. Criminals have shown growing sophistication in these operations,often purchasing businesses engaged in the shipment of goods and hiding dirty money inside the product. Experts are also detecting a significant amount of cash stockpiling, particularly in port or border regions — a phenomenon generally regarded as a step precedent to smuggling. Both trends have been attributed in part to the success of anti-money laundering measures in banks and other financial institutions.
23. A number of other money laundering techniques in the non-bank sector remain prominent.Substantial amounts of illegal proceeds, or at least funds of potentially criminal origin, are still being invested in real estate. This trend increasingly is linked to interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. The purchase and import/export of gold and jewellery remains a frequently cited trend as well. Finally, the use of international trade in the money laundering process is growing. The proceeds of crime are used to purchase goods and products which are then shipped out of the country for re-sale.
(iii) Emerging Threats: Banking Sector
24. In addition to the more familiar money laundering methods discussed above, the emergence of new payment technologies has presented new challenges. The banking and financial services industryhas been developing and testing an array of new products, referred to generally as “cyberpayments,”designed to act as cash surrogates or to provide alternative means of effecting transactions.
25. A key component of cyber payments technology is the use of so-called “smart cards,” credit-cardlike devices containing a microchip on which value is encoded. The cards can be read by vending machines or terminals that deduct the amount of each transaction from the total stored value. When thecard’s value is used up, it may be re-loaded via ATM, telephone, “electronic wallet” or personal computer, or it may be discarded. The term cyber payments also includes “electronic banking“ systems wherein value is held in a personal computer and transferred electronically over the Internet.
26. Early cyberpayments products tended to be very limited in application. For the most part, theyoperated in a closed system; transactions had to begin and/or conclude at a financial institution. They also placed limits on the active life of the cards, or on the amount of value that could be stored on them. The telephone cards in use in many European nations are an example of this predecessor technology.
27. More recently, however, cyber payments developers have been experimenting with fewer restrictions. These new products have higher or even no value limits. They can be used at any participating retail establishment. Some will permit value to be stored and transactions conducted inmultiple currencies. And, most disturbingly, some will allow value to be accessed and transferred without the need for financial institution intervention.
28. Clearly, this technology offers tremendous benefits for both government and private business.Instantaneous access to banking services from remote locations can enhance efficiency and reduce operating expenses. Unfortunately, the same advantages cyber payments generate for legitimate commerce render it equally attractive to the criminal element. The ability to conduct significant transactions anonymously and entirely outside the banking system could enable launderers to skirt the regime of cash and financial institution-based preventative measures FATF members have worked sodiligently to implement.
29. At present, the experts have no evidence to suggest that cyber payments technologies are being manipulated by criminal interests. Still, there was general agreement that this issue must be addressed directly. Given the speed with which the cyber payments industry is developing, and the fundamental threat its abuse would pose to existing anti-money laundering mechanisms, the FATF cannot afford to wait until the launderers have already begun to exploit cyber payments products. Rather, the experts were adamant that the FATF must be proactive, working with the vendors and users of cyberpayments technology to identify vulnerabilities, and to build the appropriate safeguards into system design and operation.
(iv) Emerging Threats: Non-Banking Sector
30. Outside of the banking context, the casino industry has recently been identified as vulnerable tomoney laundering. Willing casinos would be attractive to money launderers because they frequently provide the same services as do banks (including extending credit, changing currency, and transmitting funds). However, those experts who cited casinos as a potential problem were quick to note that money laundering does not appear to be prevalent in the industry at this time.
(v) Special Section: Insurance
31. Expanding on evidence uncovered during last year’s typologies exercise, a number of money laundering trends were identified or suspected in the insurance sector. The experts reported that single premium insurance bonds of one sort or another continue to be increasingly popular. Launderers purchase these products and then redeem them at a discount, the balance becoming available to the launderer in the form of a “sanitised” check from an insurance company. Single premium insurance bonds have another advantage as a money laundering vehicle because they can be used as guarantees for loans from financial institutions.
32. Another problematic aspect of the insurance industry noted by many members is the fact that asignificant percentage of insurance products are sold through intermediaries. These brokers are often the only ones having personal contact with the clients. Yet, it is the insurance companies, and not the brokers, that are responsible for reporting suspicious activity.
33. Several experts offered a sampling of the kinds of activity which should arouse suspicion inconnection with the purchase of insurance products. The insurance companies should be on alert when acash payment is made upon subscription and the subscriber changes his mind during the legalcancellation period. Another suspicious circumstance occurs where a single premium policy purchase ismade in cash or by cashier’s check in an amount that is patently disproportionate to the subscriber’s stated occupation or income. A subscription for a large amount, the premiums to be paid from abroad (often from an offshore financial centre) is patently suspect. So too is a subscription calling for the periodic payment of premiums in large amounts.
34. During the life of the insurance product, insurance companies should be concerned when thenamed beneficiary of a policy is changed to a person with no clear relationship to the subscriber. Inaddition, insurance companies should look carefully when they receive a request for security or acertificate that funds have been invested with the insurer.
35. At the termination stage, suspicions should heighten when a client displays no concern for significant tax or other penalties associated with early cancellation. Insurance companies should also pay attention to capitalisation bond redemptions requested by persons other than the subscriber. This is particularly the case when the redeemer and subscriber appear to bear no relationship to one another. Finally, firms should scrutinise cases where bonds originally subscribed by an individual in one country are redeemed by a business in another country.
36. A number of experts mentioned as an emerging trend the laundering of funds through the reinsurance industry. Criminal enterprises appear to be moving money to this sector to take advantage of its unregulated or under-regulated status.
37. Another note worthy trend is the purchase of life insurance policies in the secondary market.Criminal interests may be purchasing these policies at a discount from beneficiaries desperate for cash. The death benefits are then paid to the purchaser, who makes a profit and receives his money in the form of an insurance company check.
(vi) Special Section: Securities
38. The FATF remains concerned about the susceptibility of the securities industry to money laundering. The experts presented more evidence than last year that the securities sector was being compromised by tainted funds. As compared to the analysis of the insurance industry, however, thevolume of proof is still limited.
39. Nevertheless, it remains the general opinion of the experts that the securities sector is vulnerable to infiltration by money launderers, particularly at the layering stage. A number of features make this business an attractive target. First, it is by nature international. Brokerage firms frequently have offices all over the world, and it is ordinary for transactions to be conducted by wire transfer from, to or through multiple jurisdictions. Second, the securities markets are highly liquid. Purchases and sales can be made and settlements consummated within a very short period of time. Third, securities brokers operate in a competitive environment. Because their compensation is often based primarily on sales commissions, there is ample incentive to disregard the source of client funds. Finally, in some countries, securities accounts can be maintained by brokerage firms as nominees or trustees, thus permitting the identities of true beneficiaries to be concealed.
40. Several experts reported cases in which securities were purchased or sold, or securities accountsmanipulated, in an effort to cleanse criminal profits. They sometimes entailed many series of transactions, with purchases and sales being made by shell companies, limited partnerships and front companies so as to mask the identities of the real parties in interest. In addition, a number of the cases involved a securities industry professional who actively assisted in a money laundering scheme.
41. One delegation cited a case in which a securities professional laundered over $ US 157,000 onbehalf of a client, a public official who had misappropriated over $ US 1.4 million. The professional first opened an account in the name of the client’s wife, into which the proceeds of a legitimate real estate sale were deposited. He then engaged in a series of fraudulent “put” and “call “ transactions on the client’s behalf, fabricating contracts after the price trends of the underlying securities were already known. The contracts were designated as a put or a call based on the established price trend of the security, so as to ensure in every case that the client would realise a profit. Through this process, the professional was able to introduce over $ US 157,000 in tainted funds into the client’s account and justify its presence on the books as profit from securities investments.
42. Detecting money laundering activity in the securities context continues to be very difficult. Theexperts noted that additional efforts must be expended to identify the indicia of suspicious activity in this area. Several cited difficulty in discerning whether the funds involved in suspicious transactions were actually criminally derived.
43. Despite these difficulties, the experts agreed that it is important to forge ahead with efforts toaddress money laundering through the securities sector, in tandem with the securities regulators and the major exchanges.
C. Developments in Counter-Measures
44. Nearly all FATF members have implemented the major elements of the Forty Recommendations.However, a number have made refinements to their basic anti-money laundering framework (or intend todo so) in light of the changing nature of the threat they face. The following are some of the morenoteworthy developments either already undertaken or planned.
45. Almost all members that have not already done so are taking action to extend the scope of theirmoney laundering offence to non-drug related crimes. This trend is continuing in response to growingevidence regarding the significance of non-drug related crime as a source of illegal wealth. Examplesinclude one member, which has pending a bill to criminalise money laundering in connection with all serious crimes (including tax fraud). Another member has introduced draft legislation to includeterrorism, financial crime, corruption, kidnapping, extortion and other crimes as predicate offences within the ambit of its money laundering statute.
46. Similarly, members are continuing to extend the reach of money laundering prevention measuresto additional groups of businesses and institutions. The general thrust of these changes is to provide for more comprehensive coverage of non-bank financial institutions — in recognition of the large scalemigration of criminal funds to this sector. Thus one member enacted legislation requiring bureaux dechange to register with its central banking authority. The statute subjects bureaux de change to strict conditions of management integrity, identification, and compliance with disclosure obligations. Another member has passed legislation bringing consumer credit firms, mortgage companies, financial leasing companies and firms issuing or managing credit cards within the scope of its anti-money laundering framework. Another still has included casinos and some sellers of luxury items in its draft anti-money laundering law.
47. Some members have taken steps to better facilitate the investigation and dismantling of potentialmoney laundering operations. One, for example, has enacted legislation which allows a court to assumethat all assets held by a defendant are the proceeds of crime if the defendant is convicted of two or more serious offences (which includes laundering the proceeds of crime). One member is also modifying its legislation to lessen the burden of proof for prosecutors regarding the illegal origin of funds, and another has done so.
48. Several members have heightened efforts to invigorate the private sector in the battle against money laundering. One has established a working group comprised of representatives from the financial services sector (including non-bank financial institutions), the regulatory authorities and the law enforcement community. The group meets regularly to discuss the impact and utility of existing and proposed anti-money laundering regulations, as well as trends in criminal practices. Other members are generating or improving guidelines on suspicious transactions for dissemination to financial institutions, and pursuing money laundering awareness programs targeting at-risk industries.
49. Finally, one member is testing a program whereby financial institutions will have at their disposal computerised systems for detecting patterns of related transactions which may be indicative of money laundering. However, the system does not automatically generate reports of suspicious transactions and the financial institution’s compliance officer must determine whether a report is warranted.
D. The Situation in Non-FATF Members
50. Money laundering obviously is not a problem restricted to FATF members. All jurisdictionslinked to the international financial system are at least potentially capable of being infiltrated by illicit funds. Information on the money laundering situations in non-FATF members continues to be substantially less developed than that covering FATF members. Indeed, with the exception of the FormerSoviet Union and Eastern Bloc, members had little information to report regarding money laundering developments in other parts of the world.
51. The following sections thus reference information which surfaced during last year’s typologies exercise. The membership has no evidence to suggest that these earlier reported trends have changed appreciably. Also referenced in the section pertaining to Asia are summary conclusions from a recentty pologies exercise on Asian money laundering trends sponsored by the FATF Asian Secretariat.
(i) Asia (Excluding the Former Soviet Union)
52. The money laundering situation in Asia is characterised by several factors, although not all ofthese factors are unique to the region. First, Asian economies typically are very cash intensive, and there generally are no mechanisms in place to track large cash transactions. Second, underground banking (known variously as hundi, hawalla, chit or fei-chien systems, according to the area and ethnic groups involved) is a long-standing tradition in this part of the world. Underground banking offers a quick, cheap, efficient and anonymous means of moving money. One member observed that the rates charged by Asian underground banks tend to be extremely competitive as compared to the prevailing charges for disposing of criminal funds in other regions. Finally, few non-FATF countries in Asia have anti-money laundering laws on the books.
53. Drug trafficking has been identified as one of the principal sources of illegal proceeds in the Asian region. In the Golden Crescent (Afghanistan and Pakistan) and Golden Triangle (Myanmar, Laosand Thailand), Asia contains the world’s most significant areas of opium production. The other primary source of illegal wealth is financial crime. Smuggling, arms trafficking and corruption were also cited as less significant sources.
54. Not surprisingly, organised crime figures prominently in all of these activities. The Japanese yakuza is one of the world’s most prominent and profitable criminal organisations. Evidence indicates that the yakuza is investing in assets in various Asian and Pacific countries. In addition, overseas Chinese organised crime groups are engaged in criminal enterprises in Asia and elsewhere in the world. There are also terrorist groups in India using crime to fund their operations. And there are signs that Russian criminal enterprises are extending into East and South East Asia, supplying Russian prostitutes, buying real estate and becoming involved in gambling operations.
55. Among the money laundering techniques most frequently employed in the Asian region are:currency smuggling across national borders; the use of shell corporations; the use of bearer instruments; the use of wire transfers; the use of remittance services; the purchase of luxury items and real estate; false invoicing; laundering through casinos; and laundering through securities transactions.
(ii) South America, Central America and the Caribbean
56. South America is one of the most important areas in the world for narcotics production,particularly cocaine and cannabis. Central America and the Caribbean are significant transit areas fornarcotics. Drug production and trafficking are therefore a very significant source of illegal proceeds in these regions.
57. Money laundering methods in this part of the world are in many respects similar to those in FATFmembers. Counter-measures are substantially underdeveloped, however, and as a consequence the banking sector is still of great importance at the placement stage. This reflects the important role offshore financial centres (particularly some of the Caribbean jurisdictions) play in the global money laundering process. There is considerable physical movement of currency from North America and Western Europe into the region, which is then deposited in banks or used to purchase high value items. Criminal funds are also invested in the construction of luxury hotels and supermarkets with apparently little effort to conceal the source of the investment. In other areas, supposedly legitimate commercial transactions are used as a cover for repatriating proceeds of crime via over or under-valued invoices for the material.
58. Some members reported on important new initiatives being pursued in the region. Onedelegation noted that the thirty-four governments in the Western Hemisphere would soon be signing aCommuniqué on money laundering. The Communiqué, part of the follow up to the 1994 Summit of theAmericas, sets forth a co-ordinated, multilateral approach to combating money laundering in the hemisphere.
59. It was also reported that the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba recently passed new anti-money laundering legislation which closely tracked the Dutch legal framework. However, the legislation of the Netherlands Antilles is expected to be in force on 1 January 1997.
(iii) Africa
60. Africa remains the region on which the least information is available. FATF members simplylack evidence to suggest that the African nations harbour prominent international money laundering centres. The problems in Africa that have been detected still relate to the operations of Nigerian organised crime groups which engage in a wide range of criminal activity, including some very sophisticated fraud schemes. Other northern African nations have been connected to drug trafficking operations extending into Western Europe, where the proceeds of that activity have circulated back to the drug producing countries. Some members reported a significant amount of money laundering stemming from drug trafficking between African emigre communities in FATF member nations.
(iv) The Former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc
61. Russia and the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc present a troublesome problem for FATF members. In last year’s typologies exercise, experts reported that large volumes of cash were making their way from these countries into member banks and financial institutions. While the experts harboured suspicions that a significant portion of these funds were tied to criminal conduct, however, they expressed frustration at being unable to confirm the criminal ties in most cases.
62. This year, by contrast, the experts presented much more hard evidence that Russian organised crime groups and other illegal enterprises were penetrating legitimate financial channels to launder illgotten wealth.
63. Organised crime in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc is involved in more or less everytype of criminal activity, including drug trafficking, prostitution, trafficking in human beings, financial fraud, extortion, and trade in stolen vehicles. It is also involved in tax fraud schemes and the theft of assets from companies or state enterprises. Russian enterprises in particular have shown themselves to be extremely well managed, with a network of international contacts extending to other international criminal organisations and to emigre communities.
64. Several consistent typologies involving funds from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Blochave been observed. First, experts reported cases in which individuals opened accounts at financial institutions and deposited large amounts of cash tied to interests in Russia and Eastern Europe. Once deposited, the funds were then transferred out of the country. Often these schemes involved the assistance of a lawyer or other middle person. One delegation, for example, detected cases in which Russian money entered the banking system under the cover of solicitors’ client accounts. In another variation of this approach, a delegation reported having a number of cases were individuals exchanged large amounts of currency in banks and then, presumably, returned the money to its criminal owners in the east.
65. Another frequently cited trend involves the establishment of trading or other front companies inFATF countries. Accounts have been established at financial institutions in the names of these companies and moneys transferred to the accounts from accounts in other countries (including offshore financial centres). Often the explanation is that the transferred sums are payments for the export or import of items to and from the former Soviet Union or Eastern Bloc nations.
66. The experts reported a number of factors which suggest that a scheme of this sort is taking place.These include the fact that: 1) transaction activity in the accounts often occurs in amounts greater than that which ordinarily would be expected given the ostensible nature of the account holder’s business; 2) the documentation offered to support transactions appears false or deficient; 3) the account holder has been incorporated or registered to do business for short period; and 4) the parties on both sides of the transactions appear to be related. Again, these schemes often involve a professional money launderer, a lawyer or other citizen of the FATF country that assists in establishing the company, setting up the account and effectuating the transactions.
67. Groups tied to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc are continuing to make extensive investments in real estate, hotels, restaurants and tourist businesses in a number of Western European countries. The assets are often purchased through offshore companies with the assistance of anintermediary. One delegation reported an attempt by a Russian bank to purchase a member of its stock exchange that was on the brink of bankruptcy. Working through a solicitor, the bank tried to structure the transaction so that it obtained a controlling interest in the firm but did not own enough shares to trigger ownership disclosure requirements.
68. Although the bulk of the money is flowing from east to west, there is evidence that money from crimes committed by Russian gangs in the west is being moved back to Russia. For instance, over the past eighteen months, approximately $ US 100 million in cash has been shipped from the US to Russiaevery day, primarily through two US banks, in response to orders from Russian banks. Given the high levels of currency ordered, it is at least conceivable that some portion of the funds will be used to supply the needs of Russian organised crime, in addition to that which is applied to legitimate ends.
69. Despite mounting evidence that FATF member countries are being affected by organised crime in Russia and other areas of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc, in too many cases the experts are still unable to confirm the criminal nature of funds coming from these countries. Many attribute this problem to a lack of co-operation on the part of law enforcement authorities in the countries where the funds are originating. Wide spread corruption within authorities in Russia and the former Soviet Union is another factor.
70. It was noted that the states of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc possess many features which make a country attractive to money launderers: banking systems that are corrupt or corruptible; no money laundering legislation or an absence of meaningful legislation; the ability to buy or establish a bank with very little capital; law enforcement structures ill-equipped to investigate financial crime; a high propensity for official corruption; a desperate need for capital; disinclination on the part of law enforcement authorities to co-operate with one another. Hence, the potential exists for Russia and other Eastern European countries to become money laundering centres for proceeds of crime generated in the west.
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS
71. Money laundering remains a very serious problem in FATF countries and around the world. The“life blood” of any profit-generating criminal activity, the laundering process allows narcotics traffickers, terrorists, perpetrators of financial fraud, and every other criminal enterprise to perpetuate, and to live lavishly from, their illegal activity. The phenomenon is still a matter of concern even though we are better able to understand it, thanks in significant part to the implementation of the FATF Forty Recommendations.
72. It is difficult at the present time to assess the scale of the money laundering problem. Althoughthe experts generally agree that it amounts to hundreds of billions of dollars annually, they also acknowledge that previous attempts to arrive at a precise estimate have been empirically flawed. Nevertheless, the collective opinion is that developing a methodologically sound measure is a laudable objective and must be pursued.
73. Drug trafficking remains the single largest source of illegal proceeds, although there is general consensus among the experts that non-drug related crime is increasingly significant. Indeed, in somemembers, non-drug related crime is by far the predominant source of illicit funds.
74. Conventional money laundering techniques are still prevalent. Cash smuggling across nationalborders, for example, is a time-honoured ploy that appears to be escalating. The use of bureaux dechange to dispose of criminal proceeds has increased significantly. Professional money launderers areplaying an increasingly active role, facilitating transactions to mask the origin and ownership of tainted funds.
75. In addition to these traditional methods, potential money laundering threats have been identifiedin certain rapidly developing industries. Foremost among these is the emerging cyber payments technology sector. While there is no evidence to suggest that this industry is currently being manipulated by criminal interests, the experts agree that the FATF cannot afford to wait until it happens. The ability to access cyber payments systems to launder illicit profits could seriously undermine the effectiveness of existing anti-money laundering measures. Accordingly, the FATF must be proactive, working with the cyber payments industry to incorporate the necessary safeguards into the design and operation of these products.
76. In the insurance sector, there is an expanding pool of evidence indicating that single premium insurance products are being utilised to hide illegal wealth. Evidence also suggests that the criminal element is moving into the reinsurance industry to capitalise on the lack of effective regulation there.
77. With respect to the securities industry, there is comparatively little proof that large scale money laundering is occurring. Still, the international character of the securities business, and the liquidity and speed of securities transactions, render this sector susceptible to exploitation. It is thus important to continue working with the securities sector to develop a better understanding of any vulnerabilities inherent in this field.
78. Recognising what has become a tautology — that the money laundering problem is not confinedto the proceeds of narcotics activity alone — virtually all FATF members have expanded or are in the process of expanding their money laundering laws to include non-drug related predicate offences. Also,in response to the ever-diversifying nature of the money laundering problem, many members are takingnew steps to apply prevention measures to non-bank financial institutions and non-financial businesses. And members are making the dismantling of money laundering operations easier by removing legal impediments to investigation and prosecution, for instance by easing the burden of proof regarding the illicit origin of funds.
79. The problem of money laundering stemming from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc isincreasingly acute. There is an expanding body of evidence indicating that organised crime groups in those countries are seeking access to the financial systems of FATF members, often with the assistance of intermediaries based in member countries. There also appears to be a significant amount of capital flowing back from FATF members to interests in the east. The problem of establishing the criminal source of suspicious funds continues to plague law enforcement authorities. This problem is due in some degree to a lack of co-operation from law enforcement counterparts in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
28 June 1996
FinCEN Advisory is a product of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury, Post Office Box 39, Vienna, Virginia 22183. For more information about FinCEN’s programs, visit the FinCEN web site at https://www.fincen.gov. General questions or comments regarding FinCEN publications should be addressed to the Office of Communications, FinCEN, (703) 905-3773. Information may also be faxed to (703) 905-3885.



Content
Content
Content



20140519.pdf79.15 KB

INDEPENDENT ARMORED CAR OPERATORS ASSOCIATION CASH IN TRANSIT NETWORKING CONFERENCE
May 18, 2014



Good morning. I want to start by thanking the Independent Armored Car Operators Association for including FinCEN in its conference this year. I would like to start by just seeing a show of hands: Who here today has heard of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, known as FinCEN, or is familiar with what we do?
What is FinCEN?
For those of you that might not be familiar with the work being done at FinCEN, I wanted to spend my time today giving you a broad overview of our agency, how we do our work, and the important role armored car services play.
FinCEN is a part of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, and reports to the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. With approximately 350 employees, we are relatively small considering our broad responsibilities. Our mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.
FinCEN carries out this mission by receiving and maintaining valuable information provided by financial institutions and others; analyzing and disseminating this financial intelligence to law enforcement and other stakeholders; and sharing financial intelligence with counterpart organizations in other countries.
So, where does FinCEN get its data? A key aspect of FinCEN’s mission is to issue and administer regulations pursuant to this country’s anti-money laundering and counter financing of terrorism laws. These laws require a broad range of U.S. financial institutions and others to assist U.S. government agencies in the detection and prevention of money laundering. Financial institutions do this by maintaining records and filing reports with FinCEN on suspicious or large cash transactions. And the term “financial institution” is quite broad. It includes:
Traditional depository institutions like banks and credit unions;
Money services businesses, such as Western Union, Money Gram, and PayPal;
Casinos and some card clubs;
Insurance companies;
Securities and futures brokers;
Mutual funds;
Operators of credit card systems;
Dealers in precious metals, stones, or jewels;
Certain individuals and trades or businesses, transporting or accepting large amounts of cash;
And, most notably for today’s audience, and to the extent that they fall within any of the above categories, armored car services.
By a show of hands, how many people here knew that an armored car service, depending on the nature of the work it does, may be a financial institution with responsibility to help fight money laundering?
Collecting Financial Intelligence
I mentioned that financial institutions file certain reports with FinCEN, and I would like to discuss those briefly. There are three primary reports that FinCEN collects. The first is the Currency Transaction Report, known as the CTR. CTRs must be filed on all cash transactions exceeding $10,000.
In 2013, there were over 15 million CTRs filed by financial institutions around the country, and roughly 10% involved instances where the financial institution indicated that an armored car service was involved in the transaction.
Many of you may be familiar with a CTR-related ruling issued by FinCEN in July 2013 that discussed the treatment of armored car service transactions conducted on behalf of financial institution customers or third parties for CTR purposes.
Prior to the release of this ruling, reporting institutions were required to provide identifying information – name, date of birth, Social Security number, and a government issued identification – for the armored car services employee who delivers or picks up currency, in one or more transaction that, in the aggregate, is over $10,000 on behalf of the depository institution’s customer. However, the July 2013 ruling provided an exception to CTR data collection and aggregation requirements. We issued that ruling after determining with law enforcement that the problems arising with banks obtaining detailed information on the armored car services employees outweighed the benefit of that information. It was an example of how we balance the benefits of information collection with the burdens on industry.
The second report is called the Suspicious Activity Report (SAR). SARs are reports of suspicious transactions. While the dollar thresholds differ slightly by industry, generally speaking, if a financial institution “knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect” that any transaction or attempted transaction is suspicious, and it meets the applicable dollar threshold level, a SAR is required. Last year, 1.6 million SARs were filed with FinCEN.
The last report is the Report of International Transportation of Currency or Monetary Instruments, known more commonly as the CMIR. A CMIR must be filed by any individual or business that takes any part in physically transporting or shipping/receiving more than $10,000 in either currency or bearer negotiable instruments into or out of the United States.
FinCEN’s CMIR regulations include a limited exemption for common carriers of currency, including armored car services, that applies when certain conditions are met. The exemption primarily applies when an armored car service is transporting the cash across a land border between a foreign person and a U.S. bank.
Taken together, FinCEN’s financial intelligence includes nearly 190 million records like the ones I described. Without the financial institutions that report this information, FinCEN and our many partners would have little insight on the flow of illicit funds through our financial system. Your role is vital in our efforts to safeguard the financial system, combat money laundering, and promote national security.
Analyzing and Using the Financial Intelligence
FinCEN makes the raw financial reporting it collects directly available to more than 10,000 federal, state, and local law enforcement and regulatory users. We do this through a computer program that we call “FinCEN Query,” which allows users to easily access, query, and analyze 11 years of financial intelligence; apply filters to narrow search results; and utilize enhanced data capabilities. And there is no question that they are using it to carry out their responsibilities to protect the American public. For example, just last Thursday, there were over 30,000 queries made of our financial reporting through FinCEN Query.
As you might expect, FinCEN’s own Intelligence Division is a leader in the analysis of the raw reporting provided to us by financial institutions and others. Our advanced analytic tools and highly skilled analysts play a critical role in adding insight to the raw reporting so that law enforcement and other partners can take action against a full range of criminal and national security threats, as well as the money laundering and financing networks that support them.
FinCEN’s analysts also work hard to stay on top of our constantly evolving financial system, including emerging payment systems like stored value cards, mobile payments, and digital currencies such as Bitcoin. But while we have had a great deal of focus on these new payment systems, one long-standing notion rings true: cash is still king – particularly when it comes to laundering criminal drug proceeds. And this is where a strong intersection between your industry and one of FinCEN’s greatest priorities exists.
Bulk cash smuggling along the Southwest border, as well as the use of funnel accounts and trade based money laundering to move criminal proceeds generated by drug trafficking and other transnational criminal organizations, remains a significant threat and a high priority at FinCEN. Armored car services are well-positioned to help us identify and report activity that may be tied to the movement of such criminal proceeds. And FinCEN certainly does not want armored car services operating as conduits for such activity, even unwittingly.
Regulatory Policy
In addition to providing financial intelligence to law enforcement and helping law enforcement follow the financial trails, FinCEN also develops the policy to shape the regulatory requirements and to help clarify the financial industry’s regulatory responsibilities.
I spoke earlier about the CMIR requirement, which again states that with limited exception, a CMIR must be filed by individuals or businesses when physically transporting or shipping/receiving more than $10,000 in either currency or bearer negotiable instruments into or out of the United States.
In reviewing CMIR filings submitted by common carriers of currency, including armored car services, FinCEN has noticed a significant number of errors and failures to file required reports. We are currently working to develop guidance to ensure that common carriers, and particularly armored car services understand their reporting obligations. Working with filers to improve upon the intelligence we receive will provide FinCEN and law enforcement with more visibility of cash flows across the border and strengthen our ability to combat organized crime.
The rules and guidance issued by FinCEN’s Policy Division help financial institutions identify and manage risk; provide valuable information to law enforcement; and create the foundation of financial transparency required to deter, detect, and punish those who would abuse our financial system. It is, of course, critical that we design our laws and rules, as well as our oversight and examination efforts, to address the spectrum of risks that we face.
I mentioned earlier that FinCEN’s rules apply to money services businesses. Depending on their business model, armored car services may fall under our rules as a particular type of money services business known as money transmitters. FinCEN interprets our exemptions strictly. Generally speaking, when armored car services are acting solely at the direction of a bank, they are exempted from the rules. And when they pick up currency, funds or other value that substitutes for currency from a person and deliver to that same person at another location or to an account of that same person, they are exempted from our rules. But when they are transmitting money in other contexts, the exemption does not apply, and they have to follow our anti-money laundering rules for money transmitters.
As we engage with your industry further, we understand that you may have questions about when and how our rules apply. We encourage you to call us with those questions. Some of you have taken advantage of the ability to ask FinCEN for an administrative ruling for clarity. In fact, within the past few weeks, FinCEN published one such ruling particular to your industry. The armored car service company asked whether simply providing a denomination exchange service to customers, i.e., delivering smaller or larger denomination notes or coins in exchange for the same amount of funds in other denominations made the armored car service a money transmitter. In that instance, it was not a money transmitter, but the ruling also notes circumstances in which the armored car service might have been a money transmitter. We ask that you read our regulations and guidance carefully and follow up with us if you have questions.
But issuing regulations and guidance only goes so far. When anti-money laundering (AML) safeguards are not effectively implemented and compliance lags, money launderers and other illicit actors freely abuse our financial system. A truly robust AML framework – one that hardens our financial system against the unrelenting efforts of transnational criminal organizations and other illicit actors, as well as their money laundering networks – requires effective AML program implementation by financial institutions that understand what is at stake not only for them, but for the financial system as a whole.
And where this understanding is lacking, strong enforcement efforts may be needed. Not only do such actions correct the bad behavior of those on the receiving end, they also ensure that financial institutions that have been diligent in their efforts do not lose business to competitors seeking to cut corners with respect to AML.
Liaison and Partnership
I want to wrap-up my remarks today by speaking about the importance of partnership. I know that in the recent past, FinCEN has not engaged as actively with your industry. But this is going to change, and the change starts now. The role your industry plays within the financial system is a crucial one. We need to learn more about how your businesses operate and how your business models are changing. We also expect you to comply with applicable reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
But we also recognize that you may have questions about your requirements under the AML laws and we want to be accessible and develop an effective partnership. FinCEN has staff members present at a booth in the exhibition area and we hope you will stop by to visit and ask any questions you might have.
FinCEN’s Resource Center is also available to you at any time by calling toll free to (800) 767-2825. You can also reach us by e-mail at FRC@fincen.gov. Can I get a show of hands to see if anyone joining us this morning has ever reached out to FinCEN’s Resource Center? Our Resource Center responds to more than 26,000 phone calls and e-mail inquiries every year from financial institutions all over the country. So please do not hesitate to contact us.
From January 2013 to the present, FinCEN has received upwards of 200 inquiries regarding armored car services, many of which were from depository institutions seeking assistance with the proper way of filing a CTR when an armored car service is involved in the transaction being reported.
We have also received a number of inquiries on the July 2013 CTR ruling I mentioned earlier, requesting clarification on how the new ruling and the exceptive relief may apply to certain transactions. And we have also been reaching out to trade associations for the armored car services industry, including the National Armored Car Association, on these issues. Just as with other sectors of the financial community that fall within the scope of our regulations, our efforts to engage with the trade associations are in your interest. When we issue a regulation or guidance, we take care to avoid unintended consequences, and we need active engagement from industry and their associations to help us get it right. We know that we ask much of you in our joint efforts to safeguard the financial system, combat money laundering, and promote national security. The better we understand your business and the better you understand our mission, the better our relationship will be.
All this is to say that we encourage you to please reach out to us if you have any questions. We are eager to learn from you, and we are looking forward to a stronger partnership with your industry going forward.
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
 



Content



20140318.pdf130.67 KB

ASSOCIATION OF CERTIFIED ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING SPECIALISTS (ACAMS) 19TH ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL AML AND FINANCIAL CRIME CONFERENCE
HOLLYWOOD, FL
March 18, 2014



Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be joining you all again this year. I would like to spend my time today updating all of you on some of the high profile and sensitive issues FinCEN has been working on this past year. It has been a busy time for not only FinCEN, but for all of us in the anti-money laundering (AML) area.
I would like to first discuss FinCEN’s efforts to promote greater financial transparency in the marijuana industry. Last month, FinCEN, in coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice, issued guidance clarifying reporting and customer due diligence expectations for financial institutions seeking to provide services to marijuana businesses.
The guidance clarifies that financial institutions can provide services to marijuana-related businesses consistent with their Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) obligations.
Providing clarity in this context should enhance the availability of financial services for marijuana businesses and mitigate the dangers associated with conducting an all-cash business. The guidance also helps financial institutions file reports that contain information important to law enforcement. Law enforcement will now have greater insight into marijuana business activity generally, and will be able to focus on activity that presents high-priority concerns.
This is a unique and complex issue, and only legislative change can fully and completely address it. We believe that FinCEN's approach best balances the multiple competing interests currently at play. We are encouraged by Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) we have received so far indicating that certain financial institutions are providing banking services to marijuana-related businesses. In fact, since the guidance was issued last month, FinCEN has received dozens of SARs filed by financial institutions that are banking marijuana businesses. So, from our perspective the guidance is having the intended effect. It is facilitating access to financial services for marijuana-related businesses, while ensuring that their activity is transparent and that appropriate AML safeguards are in place.
We realize, however, that it is one thing to issue guidance from Washington. The hard part is making sure the guidance is implemented on the ground. So we are working closely with our regulatory partners both directly and through forums such as the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group (BSAAG), as well as the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), to address the practical issues that may arise as financial institutions provide services to state authorized marijuana businesses. We also encourage financial institutions to contact FinCEN’s Resource Center with any questions about the guidance.
It would be ironic if financial institutions that choose not to provide services to state authorized marijuana businesses feel like they are being asked to devote significantly more BSA compliance attention in this space than they were before the guidance was issued. Not only would it be ironic, but it would also be counterproductive as that was not the intent of the guidance. FinCEN will work with industry and our government stakeholders to help avoid what arguably would be the type of gap (or delta) between regulatory risk and actual risk that we are trying to reduce more broadly.
In a similar vein, FinCEN’s guidance included the explicit statement that FinCEN’s enforcement priorities in connection with this guidance will focus on matters of systemic or significant failures, and not isolated lapses in technical compliance. While not a novel view, we specifically highlighted this common sense position in the guidance to clarify regulatory risk and focus industry resources on priority areas. This is consistent with themes we have heard through Delta Team discussions, which I will touch more on later, and fundamental to the entire premise of the guidance itself.
Virtual currency issues have also been at the forefront this year. Because any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering, fighting such illicit use requires consistent regulation across the financial system. Virtual currency is not different from other financial products and services in this regard. What is important is that financial institutions that deal in virtual currency put effective anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML/CFT) controls in place to harden themselves from becoming the targets of illicit actors that would exploit any identified vulnerabilities.
Indeed, the idea that illicit actors might exploit the vulnerabilities of virtual currency to launder money is not merely theoretical. We have seen both centralized and decentralized virtual currencies exploited by illicit actors. With money laundering activity already valued in the billions of dollars, virtual currency is certainly worthy of FinCEN’s attention.
Just this morning, David Cohen, the Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence at the U.S. Department of the Treasury – and my boss – delivered remarks on virtual currency at an event in New York City, where he made a compelling case for transparency and regulation in the virtual currency space. I encourage all of you to visit Treasury’s website and review his speech in its entirety, as the Under Secretary’s remarks highlight how Treasury as a whole is approaching this issue.
On the regulatory side, Under Secretary Cohen noted that our current regulatory framework for decentralized virtual currencies, which guards the entryways and exits into the virtual world, provides sufficient oversight. However, if levels of adoption increase more significantly, and if it appears that daily financial life can be conducted for long stretches completely within a virtual currency environment, we may need to consider whether to apply a more “cash-like” regulation to the virtual currency space.
That being said, let me step back for a moment and put virtual currency in perspective as a payment system. The U.S. government indictment and proposed special measures issued last May against Liberty Reserve allege it was involved in laundering more than $6 billion over several years. Administrators of other major centralized virtual currencies report processing similar transaction volumes to what Liberty Reserve did.
In the case of Bitcoin, it has been publicly reported that its users processed transactions worth approximately $8 billion over the twelve-month period preceding October 2013; however, this measure may be artificially high due to the extensive use of automated layering in many Bitcoin transactions.
By way of comparison, according to information reported publicly, in 2012 Western Union made remittances totaling approximately $81 billion; PayPal processed approximately $145 billion in online payments; the Automated Clearing House Network processed $36.9 trillion in transactions; and Bank of America processed $244.4 trillion in wire transfers.
This relative volume of transactions becomes important when you consider that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the best estimate for the amount of all global criminal proceeds available for laundering through the financial system in 2009 was $1.6 trillion.
While of growing concern, to date, virtual currencies have yet to overtake more traditional methods to move funds internationally, whether for legitimate or criminal purposes.
Exactly one year ago today, FinCEN issued interpretive guidance to bring clarity and regulatory certainty for businesses and individuals engaged in money transmitting services and offering virtual currencies.
In the simplest of terms, FinCEN’s guidance explains that administrators or exchangers of virtual currencies must register with FinCEN, and institute certain recordkeeping, reporting, and AML program control measures, unless an exception to these requirements applies. The guidance also explains that those who use virtual currencies exclusively for common personal transactions – like buying goods or services online – are users, and not subject to regulatory requirements under the BSA.
In all cases, FinCEN employs an activity-based test to determine when someone dealing with virtual currency qualifies as a money transmitter. The guidance clarifies definitions and expectations to ensure that businesses engaged in such activities are aware of their regulatory responsibilities, including registering appropriately.
Furthermore, FinCEN closely coordinates with its state regulatory counterparts to encourage appropriate application of FinCEN guidance as part of the states’ separate AML compliance oversight of financial institutions.
Earlier this year, FinCEN expanded upon this guidance, issuing two administrative rulings. The rulings provide additional information on our regulatory coverage of certain activities related to convertible virtual currency. In both rulings, the convertible virtual currency at issue was the crypto-currency, Bitcoin, and we were clarifying how users who obtain virtual currency only for their own use or investment are not money transmitters.
I am also pleased to report that since FinCEN issued its guidance, dozens of virtual currency exchangers have registered with FinCEN, and some virtual currency exchangers are beginning to comply with reporting requirements and are filing SARs. They appear to be appreciative of the need to develop controls to make themselves resilient to abuse by bad actors. And they are also coming to terms with the fact that as administrators and exchangers they must obtain, verify, and store key information about the senders and recipients of virtual currency and, under certain circumstances, pass that information on to other administrators or exchangers involved in the transaction.
This last issue is key. Simply put, these exchangers and administrators, like other money transmitters, are subject to the so-called Travel Rule. Thus, they have to incorporate into their business models the same transparency with respect to funds transfers as other money transmitters.
While we are encouraged by these industry efforts to increase transparency in this space, I do, however, remain concerned that there appear to be many domestic virtual currency exchangers that are not fulfilling their recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
Those who do not comply with these rules should understand that their actions will have consequences. Not only are they subject to civil monetary penalties, but the knowing failure to register a money transmitting business with FinCEN – or with state authorities where there is a state licensing requirement – is a federal criminal offense.
One thing is clear: With all we have seen transpire this past year, the virtual currency industry has clearly reached a crossroads. I think we can all agree that the stakes are too high – for both the industry and the government – to allow virtual currency systems to be used by bad actors. So it is important that we continue to engage in open dialogue with responsible members of the virtual currency community.
And we will continue to engage in open dialogue. In that vein, I am pleased to announce that, for the first time, we will be including a member of the virtual currency community as part of the Treasury’s BSAAG. The BSAAG consists of representatives from regulatory and law enforcement agencies, financial institutions, and trade associations who advise Treasury on policy recommendations. We are hopeful that formally including the virtual currency community’s voice in BSAAG will mean that our regulatory approach as a whole, including virtual currencies specifically, is better informed and more effective.
In mentioning BSAAG, I would also like to update you on our ongoing Delta Team efforts. As I noted last year, FinCEN was just beginning to explore the delta between compliance risk and illicit finance risk through our Delta Team, a subcommittee of the BSAAG.
During our Delta Team discussions to date, we have heard many common themes raised, which I think many of you here today will agree with. We heard that additional information on money laundering trends – including more specifics on schemes and methods for illicit finance and the identification of red flags – would help industry to better align its efforts with law enforcement priorities. Providing increased transparency in this area is something with which we certainly agree.
We also heard that FinCEN needs to find ways for more dynamic, real-time information sharing, both by and between financial institutions, and with FinCEN and law enforcement. A key aspect here is to again promote information sharing between financial institutions through Section 314(a) and (b) of the USA PATRIOT Act.
In response, we have begun exploring new ways to expand information sharing from government to industry under 314(a) authorities in more targeted circumstances, and using a more dynamic and iterative approach, where warranted. We obviously cannot provide any further details publicly as the concept involves the sharing of sensitive information; however, we are working now on developing the methodology with the hope that it will one day become more routine.
I would like to turn now to one of FinCEN’s most recent areas of focus, which of course is the ongoing situation in Ukraine. There are a number of efforts underway throughout the U.S. government to assist the Government of Ukraine, and I would like to speak specifically about FinCEN’s efforts to help Ukraine combat corruption and recover stolen assets in hopes of restoring financial stability and economic growth to the country.
FinCEN issued an Advisory on February 25, 2014 to U.S. financial institutions to remind them of their responsibility to take reasonable, risk-based steps regarding the potential suspicious movement of assets related to Viktor Yanukovych and other senior officials resigning from their positions or departing Kyiv.
Financial institutions should also be aware that on March 6, 2014, as well as yesterday, March 17, the President of the United States issued Executive Orders authorizing the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to designate individuals or entities that contribute to the undermining of Ukraine’s democracy, peace, security, sovereignty or territorial integrity, or responsible for the misappropriation of Ukraine’s state assets. These Executive Orders require U.S. persons, including U.S. financial institutions and any foreign branch, to block assets of any designated individuals or entities that come under U.S. jurisdiction.
The measures being taken against these former Ukrainian officials and their close associates increase the risk that they will seek to move their assets in a deceptive fashion. To help mitigate this risk, FinCEN’s most recent Advisory on March 6, 2014 provides U.S. financial institutions with the names and identifying information of those persons who have been subject to European Union and Canadian sanctions because of their apparent role in the misappropriation of state assets or instability in Ukraine. As the inclusion of this information highlights, FinCEN’s efforts are not just domestic, but global.
FinCEN’s Advisory reminds U.S. financial institutions that they are required to apply enhanced scrutiny to private banking accounts held by or on behalf of senior foreign political figures and to monitor transactions to or from those accounts that could potentially represent misappropriated or diverted state assets, the proceeds of bribery or other illegal payments, or other public corruption proceeds.
Financial institutions should be aware of the possible impact that public reports of high-level corruption by senior members of the Yanukovych administration and other illicit activity by members of the administration may have on patterns of financial activity when assessing risks related to particular customers and transactions.
FinCEN’s advisory is focused on potentially suspicious transactions involving senior members of the Yanukovych administration or those acting for or on their behalf, and is not intended to call into question the maintenance of normal relationships between financial institutions in the United States and Ukraine.
If a financial institution knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that a transaction relating to senior foreign political figures involves funds derived from illicit activity, including money laundering, terrorist financing, or any other violation of law or regulation, or if the transaction appears to have no business or lawful purpose or has a purpose inconsistent with the customer’s known business, the financial institution must file a SAR consistent with FinCEN’s regulations.
In addition, financial institutions are reminded of the regulations implementing Section 312 of the USA PATRIOT Act, which require a written due diligence program for private banking accounts held for non-U.S. persons designed to detect and report any known or suspected money laundering or other suspicious activity. In instances where senior foreign political figures maintain private banking accounts at a covered institution, those financial institutions are required to apply enhanced scrutiny of such accounts to detect and report transactions that may involve the proceeds of foreign corruption.
In April 2008, FinCEN issued Guidance to assist financial institutions with reporting suspicious activity regarding proceeds of foreign corruption. That Guidance, available on FinCEN’s website, also discusses potential indicators that transactions may be related to proceeds of foreign corruption. Financial institutions may find this Guidance useful in assisting with suspicious activity monitoring and due diligence requirements related to senior foreign political figures.
All of this is to say that, as the situation with respect to Ukraine unfolds, we appreciate the help of your financial institutions in monitoring the suspicious movement of assets tied to former Ukrainian officials and their associates. We must work together to remain vigilant and to proactively identify and address illicit financial activity.
One last issue on the policy front: customer due diligence. The cornerstone of a strong AML compliance program is the adoption and implementation of internal controls, which include comprehensive customer due diligence (CDD) policies, procedures, and processes for all customers, particularly those that present a high risk for money laundering or terrorist financing.
The issues surrounding CDD are complicated, and we are continuing to work hard in hopes of issuing the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking soon.
This past year, FinCEN also established a stand-alone Enforcement Division to ensure that we are fulfilling our role in the enforcement of our AML regime.
Our Enforcement Division serves as the primary action arm for asserting our regulatory authorities against jurisdictions and financial institutions that are of primary money laundering concern outside the United States, as well as civil enforcement of the BSA at home. FinCEN has broad ground to cover with a small, but dedicated, staff.
When bad actors take their business offshore, FinCEN will take action to counter these threats. As our Section 311 authority shows, once FinCEN determines that a foreign financial institution, foreign jurisdiction, type of account, or class of transaction is of “primary money laundering concern,” the Director has the authority to require domestic financial institutions to take certain special measures to address the concern.
As I mentioned earlier, through a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, FinCEN identified Liberty Reserve, a Web-based virtual currency service, as a financial institution of primary money laundering concern under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT ACT. The action was the first use of Section 311 authorities by FinCEN against a virtual currency provider. Liberty Reserve was widely used by criminals around the world to store, transfer, and launder the proceeds of their illicit activities. Liberty Reserve’s virtual currency had become a preferred method of payment on websites dedicated to the promotion and facilitation of illicit Web-based activity, including identity fraud, credit card theft, money laundering, online scams, and dissemination of computer malware. It sought to avoid regulatory scrutiny while tailoring its services to illicit actors.
Likewise, when bad actors compromise financial institutions in the United States, FinCEN will take action to stop these abuses, as well. And nowhere is this more important than in those sectors of the financial industry where FinCEN is the only federal regulator with AML enforcement authorities, such as money services businesses (MSBs).
Just last month, FinCEN assessed a civil money penalty against an MSB after our investigation determined serious and willful violations of BSA program, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements. As part of FinCEN’s enforcement action, the MSB and its individual owner agreed to cease operating as an MSB and immediately surrendered the MSB’s registration to FinCEN.
As Director, I feel it is important that financial institutions take responsibility when their actions violate the BSA. And by accepting responsibility, it is not just about admitting to the facts alleged in FinCEN’s enforcement action. It is also about admitting a violation of the law. Over the last year, we have changed our practice at FinCEN to one in which our presumption is that a settlement of an enforcement action will include an admission to the facts, as well as the violation of law. And we have begun implementing this practice in our enforcement actions against all sizes and types of financial institutions.
Integrity and transparency goes a long way. It is a great bestowal of trust that enables financial institutions to be part of the U.S. financial system, to be part of the global financial system. And that trust – that privilege – comes with obligations. One of those obligations is a responsibility to put effective AML controls in place so criminals and terrorists are not able to operate with impunity in the U.S. financial system.
As FinCEN’s recent enforcement actions show, FinCEN will act under such circumstances to protect the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system.
I know I have covered quite a bit of ground today, but I hope you found my updates helpful in understanding how FinCEN is approaching a number of high-priority issues. But in looking ahead, it is clear that there is still much work to be done, and there will always be new threats to mitigate. And the overriding key to our success is our ongoing partnerships with all of you here today.
Thank you for the role you play in building the strong public-private partnerships that are so vital to our collective efforts to safeguard the financial system from illicit use. For me, building these partnerships – and learning from each of you – is truly the most rewarding and inspiring part of my job.
Being here today, where we can all learn how to better work together, is so important. Keeping this dialogue going will benefit all of us. And I am certainly committed to maximizing our ability to be effective partners and colleagues as we work together to protect the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system.
 



Content



20140220.pdf98.2 KB

FLORIDA INTERNATIONAL BANKERS ASSOCIATION ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING CONFERENCE
MIAMI, FL
February 20, 2014



Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be joining you again this year. Today, I will focus my remarks on some of the key events for FinCEN in the last year (a bit of a "year in review"), as well as some of the issues we expect to be a prominent part of our collective anti-money laundering (AML) conversation during the year ahead.
Looking Back
The past year has been a busy one for FinCEN within our policy area, as we tackled a number of very high-profile and sensitive issues.
Just last week, in seeking to promote greater financial transparency in the marijuana industry, FinCEN, in coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice, issued guidance that clarifies reporting and customer due diligence expectations for financial institutions seeking to provide services to marijuana businesses.
The guidance clarifies that financial institutions can provide services to marijuana-related businesses consistent with their Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) obligations.
Providing clarity in this context should enhance the availability of financial services for marijuana businesses and mitigate the dangers associated with conducting an all-cash business. The guidance also helps financial institutions file reports that contain information important to law enforcement. Law enforcement will now have greater insight into marijuana business activity generally, and will be able to focus on activity that presents high-priority concerns.
This is a unique and complex issue, and only legislative change can fully and completely address it. We believe that FinCEN's approach best balances the multiple competing interests currently at play.
Virtual currency issues have also been on the front burner this year. Because any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering, fighting such illicit use requires consistent regulation across the financial system. Virtual currency is not different from other financial products and services in this regard. What is important is that financial institutions that deal in virtual currency put effective anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML/CFT) controls in place to harden themselves from becoming the targets of illicit actors that would exploit any identified vulnerabilities.
Indeed, the idea that illicit actors might exploit the vulnerabilities of virtual currency to launder money is not merely theoretical. We have seen both centralized and decentralized virtual currencies exploited by illicit actors. With money laundering activity already valued in the billions of dollars, virtual currency is certainly worthy of FinCEN’s attention.
That being said, it is also important to put virtual currency in perspective as a payment system. The U.S. government indictment and proposed special measures issued last May against Liberty Reserve allege it was involved in laundering more than $6 billion over several years. Administrators of other major centralized virtual currencies report processing similar transaction volumes to what Liberty Reserve did.
In the case of Bitcoin, it has been publicly reported that its users processed transactions worth approximately $8 billion over the twelve-month period preceding October 2013; however, this measure may be artificially high due to the extensive use of automated layering in many Bitcoin transactions.
By way of comparison, according to information reported publicly, in 2012 Western Union made remittances totaling approximately $81 billion, PayPal processed approximately $145 billion in online payments, the Automated Clearing House Network processed $36.9 trillion in transactions, and Bank of America processed $244.4 trillion in wire transfers.
This relative volume of transactions becomes important when you consider that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the best estimate for the amount of all global criminal proceeds available for laundering through the financial system in 2009 was $1.6 trillion.
While of growing concern, to date, virtual currencies have yet to overtake more traditional methods to move funds internationally, whether for legitimate or criminal purposes.
Just a few weeks after I spoke last year, FinCEN issued interpretive guidance in March 2013 to bring clarity and regulatory certainty for businesses and individuals engaged in money transmitting services and offering virtual currencies.
Earlier this year, FinCEN expanded upon this guidance, issuing two administrative rulings. The rulings provide additional information on our regulatory coverage of certain activities related to convertible virtual currency. In both rulings, the convertible virtual currency at issue was the crypto-currency, Bitcoin.
The first ruling states that, to the extent a user creates or “mines” a convertible virtual currency solely for a user’s own purposes, the user is not a money transmitter. The second states that a company purchasing and selling convertible virtual currency as an investment exclusively for the company’s benefit is not a money transmitter.
Since our March 2013 guidance was issued, many of the questions we have received have been about the applicability of our regulations to users of convertible virtual currency and, in particular, Bitcoin. We are hopeful that these rulings will help provide clarity in this area.
I would also like to update you on our ongoing Delta Team efforts. As I noted last year, FinCEN was just beginning to explore the delta between compliance risk and illicit finance risk through our Delta Team, a subcommittee of the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group (BSAAG). I would be remiss if I didn’t spend a few moments acknowledging the invaluable contributions Clemente Vasquez Bello made to our BSAAG efforts over the years.
The passion and dedication that Clemente brought for many years to our BSAAG discussions was second to none, and he has been sorely missed. I know from my own discussions with Clemente that an area he cared deeply about was striking the right balance between money laundering prevention and BSA reporting.
On one hand, if you focus too much on the prevention side within your financial institution, you could lose visibility as illicit actors burrow deeper into layers of client relationships, and we lose valuable reporting. But, if you focus only on reporting suspected illicit activity, while allowing illicit actors to continue receiving services, prevention-related efforts will be undermined and the U.S. financial system compromised.
What we all learned from our discussions with Clemente about this, as well as many other issues, is that there is no bright line. This is one of many issues that lie on a spectrum, and where financial institutions need to strike a balance. Strong public/private partnerships play an important role in helping strike that balance.
Clemente’s fervor for these issues continues to resonate and will have a long-lasting impact on our work within the Delta Team. And we are grateful to have David Schwartz now representing FIBA within BSAAG to continue bringing valuable perspectives to our discussions.
I want to turn back for a moment to some of the common themes raised through our Delta Team discussions. We heard that additional information on money laundering trends -- including more specifics on schemes and methods for illicit finance and the identification of red flags -- would help industry to better align its efforts with law enforcement priorities. Providing increased transparency in this area is something with which we certainly agree.
We also heard that FinCEN needs to find ways for more dynamic, real-time information sharing, both by and between financial institutions, and with FinCEN and law enforcement. A key aspect here is to again promote information sharing between financial institutions through Section 314(a) and (b) of the USA PATRIOT Act.
In response, we have begun exploring new ways to expand information sharing from government to industry under 314(a) authorities in more targeted circumstances, and using a more dynamic and iterative approach, where warranted. We obviously cannot provide any further details publically as the concept involves the sharing of sensitive information; however, we are working now on developing the methodology with the hope that it will one day become more routine.
One last issue on the policy front: customer due diligence. The cornerstone of a strong AML compliance program is the adoption and implementation of internal controls, which include comprehensive customer due diligence (CDD) policies, procedures, and processes for all customers, particularly those that present a high risk for money laundering or terrorist financing.
The issues surrounding CDD are complicated, and we are continuing to work hard in hopes of issuing the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking soon.
This past year, FinCEN also established a stand-alone Enforcement Division to ensure that we are fulfilling our role in the enforcement of our AML regime.
Our Enforcement Division serves as the primary action arm for asserting our regulatory authorities against jurisdictions and financial institutions that are of primary money laundering concern outside the United States, as well as civil enforcement of the BSA at home. FinCEN has broad ground to cover with a small, but dedicated, staff.
When bad actors take their business offshore, FinCEN will take action to counter these threats. As our Section 311 authority shows, once FinCEN determines that a foreign financial institution, foreign jurisdiction, type of account, or class of transaction is of “primary money laundering concern,” the Director has the authority to require domestic financial institutions to take certain special measures to address the concern.
Since I spoke with you last year, FinCEN named Liberty Reserve, a Web-based virtual currency service, as a financial institution of primary money laundering concern under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT ACT. The action was the first use of Section 311 authorities by FinCEN against a virtual currency provider. Liberty Reserve was widely used by criminals around the world to st transfer, and launder the proceeds of their illicit activities. Liberty Reserve’s virtual currency had become a preferred method of payment on websites dedicated to the promotion and facilitation of illicit web based activity, including identity fraud, credit card theft, money laundering, online scams, and dissemination of computer malware. It sought to avoid regulatory scrutiny while tailoring its services to illicit actors.
Likewise, when bad actors compromise financial institutions in the United States, FinCEN will take action to stop these abuses, as well. And nowhere is this more important than in those sectors of the financial industry where FinCEN is the only federal regulator with AML enforcement authorities, such as money services businesses (MSBs).
Just this month, FinCEN assessed a civil money penalty against an MSB after our investigation determined serious and willful violations of BSA program, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements. As part of FinCEN’s enforcement action, the MSB and its individual owner agreed to cease operating as a money services business and immediately surrendered the MSB’s registration to FinCEN.
The MSB admitted to failing to implement any AML/CFT program. During its operation, the MSB transmitted approximately 1,400 wires per year to Yemen, a high-risk country for terrorist activity and money laundering. The MSB failed to review any of these or other transactions for suspicious activity and admitted to deliberately ignoring its BSA obligations for fear of losing customers. The MSB also admitted that its conduct violated the BSA.
As Director, I feel it is important that financial institutions take responsibility when their actions violate the BSA. And by accepting responsibility, it is not just about admitting to the facts alleged in FinCEN’s enforcement action. It is also about admitting a violation of the law. Over the last year, we have changed our practice at FinCEN to one in which our presumption is that a settlement of an enforcement action will include an admission to the facts, as well as the violation of law. And, we have begun implementing this practice in our enforcement actions against all sizes and types of financial institutions.
Integrity and transparency goes a long way. It is a great bestowal of trust that enables financial institutions to be part of the U.S. financial system, to be part of the global financial system. And that trust -- that privilege -- comes with obligations. One of those obligations is a responsibility to put effective AML controls in place so criminals and terrorists are not able to operate with impunity in the U.S. financial system.
As FinCEN’s recent enforcement actions show, FinCEN will act under such circumstances to protect the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system.
Looking Ahead
I would now like to focus on some of the threats that will continue keeping our attention this year, as well as some new concerns on our radar.
On the virtual currency front, with all we have seen transpire this past year; it is clear that the virtual currency industry has reached a crossroads. I think we can all agree that the stakes are too high – for both the industry and the government – to allow virtual currency systems to be used by bad actors. FinCEN will continue to draw from the knowledge we have gained through our regulatory efforts, use of targeted financial measures, analysis of the financial intelligence we collect, independent study of virtual currency, outreach to industry, and collaboration with our many partners in law enforcement to protect the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system.
An area of increasing concern to FinCEN is third party money launderers. Third party money launderers are professional money launderers. For example, for the Breaking Bad fans out there, Saul Goodman would be considered a third party money launderer.
Using their connections, professional expertise, and influence, third party money launderers transfer funds on behalf of others, knowing that the funds are involved in illicit activity. This access allows criminals to circumvent anti-money laundering controls both in the United States and abroad.
Third-party money launderers rely on different schemes to infiltrate financial institutions, including: layering financial transactions, creating or using shell and shelf corporations, creating or using false documentation, using political influence to facilitate financial activity, and exerting inappropriate influence over key employees in financial institutions.
Let me be clear. Just because a third party money launderer may be located outside of our borders does not mean they can operate with impunity within our financial system. FinCEN’s 311 and other authorities can – and will – be used to take action against third party money launderers located outside of the United States.
FinCEN is also trying to get a better handle on the use of cash in the securities sectors for other countries. For example, FinCEN’s analysis recently revealed that Mexican casa de bolsas (Mexican securities firms) are starting to bring U.S. cash dollars into the United States and deposit this cash into U.S. banks. U.S. financial institutions dealing with foreign securities firms should be mindful of their source of funding, given the heightened drug trafficking and money laundering risks associated with U.S. cash dollars from Mexico.
More broadly, when securities firms offer services similar to banks, they need to also consider the vulnerabilities associated with engaging in these types of services, and to make sure that their compliance programs are commensurate with such risks. To the extent that these entities are providing bank-like services, we need to make sure that essentially the same types of AML obligations and compliance activities applicable to banks are in place – notwithstanding the fact that the institution might not be a bank.
FinCEN also continues to focus on the major threat posed by trade-based money laundering, one of the most popular methods used by Transnational Organized Crime (TOC) groups to move their money all over the world. By moving their illegal proceeds, often through the formal banking system, criminals are able to disguise their illegal proceeds as legitimate trade transactions. In the process, criminal organizations are able to exploit the complex and sometimes confusing documentation that is frequently associated with legitimate trade transactions.
Moving forward, FinCEN aims to use our new advanced analytics tools to not only detect, but anticipate where trade-based money laundering activities might be manifested. This type of analysis will significantly improve our efforts by allowing us to focus on those regions or financial sectors where money laundering or financial crimes are most prevalent and the most vulnerable.
On the policy front, another area where I see discussions going forward, and where your insights will be valuable, is balancing the policy motivations behind data privacy and secrecy laws in different jurisdictions with the need for an appropriate level of transparency to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. This issue is particularly critical in the area of correspondent banking, and strongly implicates the future of de-risking.
This issue is beginning to gain momentum, particularly as financial institutions grapple with how they can share information to ensure transparency in the global financial system, as well as feel comfortable processing specific transactions. We are working closely with a variety of jurisdictions through the Financial Action Task Force and other bilateral and multilateral venues to address this issue.
Looking forward on the enforcement side, we know that the vast majority of the industry, and in particular the compliance officers within financial institutions, are doing everything they can to comply with their responsibilities. We appreciate all you are doing to keep your financial institutions safe from illicit use. We also appreciate, however, your own frustrations when you see institutions not doing what they are supposed to be doing, and not taking compliance seriously enough.
FinCEN will continue to employ all of the tools at our disposal and hold accountable those institutions and individuals who recklessly allow our financial institutions to be vulnerable to terrorist financing, money laundering, proliferation finance, and other illicit financial activity.
Conclusion
In closing today, I would like to circle back to a common theme woven throughout our work at FinCEN: Partnership. Thank you for the role you play in building the strong public-private partnerships that are so vital to our collective efforts to safeguard the financial system from illicit use. For me, building these partnerships -- and learning from each of you -- is truly the most rewarding and inspiring part of my job.
I think my remarks today illustrate our most recent efforts to counter many high-profile and pressing threats. But in looking ahead, it is clear that there is still much work to be done, and there will always be new threats to mitigate.
In addressing new threats, FinCEN works hard to consider the needs and equities of all stakeholders, including law enforcement, regulators, foreign financial intelligence units, industry, and the public. That is why being here today, where we can all learn how to better work together, is so important. Keeping this dialogue going will benefit all of us. And I am certainly committed to maximizing our ability to be effective partners and colleagues.
 



Content



20131119.pdf357.79 KB

Before the United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Subcommittee on National Security and International Trade and Finance Subcommittee on Economic Policy
November 19, 2013



Chairmen Warner and Merkley, Ranking Members Kirk and Heller, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittees, I am Jennifer Shasky Calvery, Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), and I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss FinCEN’s ongoing role in the Administration’s efforts to establish a meaningful regulatory framework for virtual currencies that intersect with the U.S. financial system. We appreciate the Committee’s interest in this important issue, and your continued support of our efforts to prevent illicit financial activity from exploiting potential gaps in our regulatory structure as technological advances create new and innovative ways to move money.
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities. FinCEN works to achieve its mission through a broad range of interrelated strategies, including:
Administering the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) - the United States’ primary anti-money laundering (AML)/counter-terrorist financing (CFT) regulatory regime;
Sharing the rich financial intelligence we collect, as well as our analysis and expertise, with law enforcement, intelligence, and regulatory partners; and,
Building global cooperation and technical expertise among financial intelligence units throughout the world.
To accomplish these activities, FinCEN employs a team comprised of approximately 340 dedicated employees with a broad range of expertise in illicit finance, financial intelligence, the financial industry, the AML/CFT regulatory regime, technology, and enforcement. We also leverage our close relationships with regulatory, law enforcement, international, and industry partners to increase our collective insight and better protect the U.S. financial system.
What is Virtual Currency?
 
Before moving into a discussion of FinCEN’s role in ensuring we have smart regulation for virtual currency that is not too burdensome but also protects the U.S. financial system from illicit use, let me set the stage with some of the definitions we are using at FinCEN to understand virtual currency and the various types present in the market today. Virtual currency is a medium of exchange that operates like a currency in some environments but does not have all the attributes of real currency. In particular, virtual currency does not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction. A convertible virtual currency either has an equivalent value in real currency, or acts as a substitute for real currency. In other words, it is a virtual currency that can be exchanged for real currency. At FinCEN, we have focused on two types of convertible virtual currencies: centralized and decentralized.
Centralized virtual currencies have a centralized repository and a single administrator. Liberty Reserve, which FinCEN identified earlier this year as being of primary money laundering concern pursuant to Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act, is an example of a centralized virtual currency. Decentralized virtual currencies, on the other hand, and as the name suggests, have no central repository and no single administrator. Instead, value is electronically transmitted between parties without an intermediary. Bitcoin is an example of a decentralized virtual currency. Bitcoin is also known as cryptocurrency, meaning that it relies on cryptographic software protocols to generate the currency and validate transactions.
There are a variety of methods an individual user might employ to obtain, spend, and then “cash out” either a centralized or decentralized virtual currency. The following illustration shows a typical series of transactions in a centralized virtual currency, such as Liberty Reserve:

By way of comparison, the next illustration shows a very similar series of transactions in a decentralized virtual currency such as Bitcoin:

From a “follow the money” standpoint, the main difference between these two series of transactions is the absence of an “administrator” serving as intermediary in the case of Bitcoin. This difference does have significance in FinCEN’s regulatory approach to virtual currency, and that approach will be addressed further during the course of my testimony today.
Money Laundering Vulnerabilities in Virtual Currencies
 
Any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering or terrorist financing. Virtual currency is not different in this regard. As with all parts of the financial system, though, FinCEN seeks to understand the specific attributes that make virtual currency vulnerable to illicit use, so that we can both employ a smart regulatory approach and encourage industry to develop mitigating features in its products.
Some of the following reasons an illicit actor might decide to use a virtual currency to store and transfer value are the same reasons that legitimate users have, while other reasons are more nefarious. Specifically, an illicit actor may choose to use virtually currency because it:
Enables the user to remain relatively anonymous;
Is relatively simple for the user to navigate;
May have low fees;
Is accessible across the globe with a simple Internet connection;
Can be used both to store value and make international transfers of value;
Does not typically have transaction limits;
Is generally secure;
Features irrevocable transactions;
Depending on the system, may have been created with the intent (and added features) to facilitate money laundering;
If it is decentralized, has no administrator to maintain information on users and report suspicious activity to governmental authorities;
Can exploit weaknesses in the anti-money laundering/counter terrorist financing (AML/CFT) regimes of various jurisdictions, including international disparities in, and a general lack of, regulations needed to effectively support the prevention and detection of money laundering and terrorist financing.
Because any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering, fighting such illicit use requires consistent regulation across the financial system. Virtual currency is not different from other financial products and services in this regard. What is important is that financial institutions that deal in virtual currency put effective AML/CFT controls in place to harden themselves from becoming the targets of illicit actors that would exploit any identified vulnerabilities.
Indeed, the idea that illicit actors might exploit the vulnerabilities of virtual currency to launder money is not merely theoretical. We have seen both centralized and decentralized virtual currencies exploited by illicit actors. Liberty Reserve used its centralized virtual currency as part of an alleged $6 billion money laundering operation purportedly used by criminal organizations engaged in credit card fraud, identity theft, investment fraud, computer hacking, narcotics trafficking, and child pornography. One Liberty Reserve co-founder has already pleaded guilty to money laundering in the scheme. And just recently, the Department of Justice has alleged that customers of Silk Road, the largest narcotic and contraband marketplace on the Internet to date, were required to pay in bitcoins to enable both the operator of Silk Road and its sellers to evade detection and launder hundreds of millions of dollars. With money laundering activity already valued in the billions of dollars, virtual currency is certainly worthy of FinCEN’s attention.
That being said, it is also important to put virtual currency in perspective as a payment system. The U.S. government indictment and proposed special measures against Liberty Reserve allege it was involved in laundering more than $6 billion. Administrators of other major centralized virtual currencies report processing similar transaction volumes to what Liberty Reserve did. In the case of Bitcoin, it has been publicly reported that its users processed transactions worth approximately $8 billion over the twelve-month period preceding October 2013; however, this measure may be artificially high due to the extensive use of automated layering in many Bitcoin transactions. By way of comparison, according to information reported publicly, in 2012 Bank of America processed $244.4 trillion in wire transfers, PayPal processed approximately $145 billion in online payments, Western Union made remittances totaling approximately $81 billion, the Automated Clearing House (ACH) Network processed more than 21 billion transactions with a total dollar value of $36.9 trillion, and Fedwire, which handles large-scale wholesale transfers, processed 132 million transactions for a total of $599 trillion. This relative volume of transactions becomes important when you consider that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the best estimate for the amount of all global criminal proceeds available for laundering through the financial system in 2009 was $1.6 trillion. While of growing concern, to date, virtual currencies have yet to overtake more traditional methods to move funds internationally, whether for legitimate or criminal purposes.
Mitigating Money Laundering Vulnerabilities in Virtual Currencies
 
FinCEN’s main goal in administering the BSA is to ensure the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system so that money laundering and terrorist financing can be prevented and, where it does occur, be detected for follow on action. One of our biggest challenges is striking the right balance between the costs and benefits of regulation. One strategy we use to address this challenge is to promote consistency, where possible, in our regulatory framework across different parts of the financial services industry. It ensures a level playing field for industry and minimizes gaps in our AML/CFT coverage.
Recognizing the emergence of new payment methods and the potential for abuse by illicit actors, FinCEN began working with our law enforcement and regulatory partners several years ago to study the issue. We understood that AML protections must keep pace with the emergence of new payment systems, such as virtual currency and prepaid cards, lest those innovations become a favored tool of illicit actors. In July 2011, after a public comment period designed to receive feedback from industry, FinCEN released two rules that update several definitions and provide the needed flexibility to accommodate innovation in the payment systems space under our preexisting regulatory framework. Those rules are: (1) Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Money Services Businesses; and (2) Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Prepaid Access.
The updated definitions reflect FinCEN’s earlier guidance and rulings, as well as current business operations in the industry. As such, they have been able to accommodate the development of new payment systems, including virtual currency. Specifically, the new rule on money services businesses added the phrase “other value that substitutes for currency” to the definition of “money transmission services.” And since a convertible virtual currency either has an equivalent value in real currency, or acts a substitute for real currency, it qualifies as “other value that substitutes for currency” under the definition of “money transmission services.” A person that provides money transmission services is a “money transmitter,” a type of money services business already covered by the AML/CFT protections in the BSA.
As a follow-up to the regulations and in an effort to provide additional clarity on the compliance expectations for those actors involved in virtual currency transactions subject to FinCEN oversight, on March 18, 2013, FinCEN supplemented its money services business regulations with interpretive guidance designed to clarify the applicability of the regulations implementing the BSA to persons creating, obtaining, distributing, exchanging, accepting, or transmitting virtual currencies. In the simplest of terms, FinCEN’s guidance explains that administrators or exchangers of virtual currencies must register with FinCEN, and institute certain recordkeeping, reporting and AML program control measures, unless an exception to these requirements applies. The guidance also explains that those who use virtual currencies exclusively for common personal transactions like buying goods or services online are users, not subject to regulatory requirements under the BSA. In all cases, FinCEN employs an activity-based test to determine when someone dealing with virtual currency qualifies as a money transmitter. The guidance clarifies definitions and expectations to ensure that businesses engaged in such activities are aware of their regulatory responsibilities, including registering appropriately. Furthermore, FinCEN closely coordinates with its state regulatory counterparts to encourage appropriate application of FinCEN guidance as part of the states’ separate AML compliance oversight of financial institutions.
It is in the best interest of virtual currency providers to comply with these regulations for a number of reasons. First is the idea of corporate responsibility. Legitimate financial institutions, including virtual currency providers, do not go into business with the aim of laundering money on behalf of criminals. Virtual currencies are a financial service, and virtual currency administrators and exchangers are financial institutions. As I stated earlier, any financial institution could be exploited for money laundering purposes. What is important is for institutions to put controls in place to deal with those money laundering threats, and to meet their AML reporting obligations.
At the same time, being a good corporate citizen and complying with regulatory responsibilities is good for a company’s bottom line. Every financial institution needs to be concerned about its reputation and show that it is operating with transparency and integrity within the bounds of the law. Legitimate customers will be drawn to a virtual currency or administrator or exchanger where they know their money is safe and where they know the company has a reputation for integrity. And banks will want to provide services to administrators or exchangers that show not only great innovation, but also great integrity and transparency.
The decision to bring virtual currency within the scope of our regulatory framework should be viewed by those who respect and obey the basic rule of law as a positive development for this sector. It recognizes the innovation virtual currencies provide, and the benefits they might offer society. Several new payment methods in the financial sector have proven their capacity to empower customers, encourage the development of innovative financial products, and expand access to financial services. We want these advances to continue. However, those institutions that choose to act outside of their AML obligations and outside of the law have and will continue to be held accountable. FinCEN will do everything in its regulatory power to stop such abuses of the U.S. financial system.
As previously mentioned, earlier this year, FinCEN identified Liberty Reserve as a financial institution of primary money laundering concern under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act. Liberty Reserve operated as an online, virtual currency, money transfer system conceived and operated specifically to allow – and encourage – illicit use because of the anonymity it offered. It was deliberately designed to avoid regulatory scrutiny and tailored its services to illicit actors looking to launder their ill-gotten gains. According to the allegations contained in a related criminal action brought by the U.S. Department of Justice, those illicit actors included criminal organizations engaged in credit card fraud, identity theft, investment fraud, computer hacking, narcotics trafficking, and child pornography, just to name a few. The 311 action taken by FinCEN was designed to restrict the ability of Liberty Reserve to access the U.S. financial system, publicly notify the international financial community of the risks posed by Liberty Reserve, and to send a resounding message to other offshore money launderers that such abuse of the U.S. financial system will not be tolerated and their activity can be reached through our targeted financial measures.
Sharing Our Knowledge and Expertise on Virtual Currency
 
As the financial intelligence unit for the United States, FinCEN must stay current on how money is being laundered in the United States, including through new and emerging payment systems, so that we can share this expertise with our many law enforcement, regulatory, industry, and foreign financial intelligence unit partners, and effectively serve as the cornerstone of this country’s AML/CFT regime. FinCEN has certainly sought to meet this responsibility with regard to virtual currency and its exploitation by illicit actors. In doing so, we have drawn and continue to draw from the knowledge we have gained through our regulatory efforts, use of targeted financial measures, analysis of the financial intelligence we collect, independent study of virtual currency, outreach to industry, and collaboration with our many partners in law enforcement.
In the same month we issued our guidance on virtual currency, March 2013, FinCEN also issued a Networking Bulletin on crypto-currencies to provide a more granular explanation of this highly complex industry to law enforcement and assist it in following the money as it funnels between virtual currency channels and the U.S. financial system. Among other things, the bulletin addresses the role of traditional banks, money transmitters, and exchangers that come into play as intermediaries by enabling users to fund the purchase of virtual currencies and exchange virtual currencies for other types of currency. It also highlights known records processes associated with virtual currencies and the potential value these records may offer to investigative officials. The bulletin has been in high demand since its publication and the feedback regarding its tremendous value has come from the entire spectrum of our law enforcement partners. In fact, demand for more detailed information on crypto-currencies has been so high that we have also shared it with several of our regulatory and foreign financial intelligence unit partners.
One feature of a FinCEN Networking Bulletin is that it asks the readers to provide ongoing feedback on what they are learning through their investigations so that we can create a forum to quickly learn of new developments, something particularly important with a new payment method. Based on what we are learning through this forum and other means, FinCEN has issued several analytical products of a tactical nature to inform law enforcement operations.
Equally important to our ongoing efforts to deliver expertise to our law enforcement partners is FinCEN’s engagement with our regulatory counterparts to ensure they are kept apprised of the latest trends in virtual currencies and the potential vulnerabilities they pose to traditional financial institutions under their supervision. FinCEN uses its collaboration with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) BSA Working Group as a platform to review and discuss FinCEN’s regulations and guidance, and the most recent and relevant trends in virtual currencies. One such example occurred just recently, when several FinCEN virtual currency experts gave a comprehensive presentation on the topic to an audience of Federal and state bank examiners at an FFIEC Payment Systems Risk Conference. The presentation covered an overview of virtual currency operations, FinCEN’s guidance on the application of FinCEN regulations to virtual currency, enforcement actions, and ongoing industry outreach efforts.
FinCEN also participates in the FBI-led Virtual Currency Emerging Threats Working Group, the FDIC-led Cyber Fraud Working Group, the Terrorist Financing & Financial Crimes-led Treasury Cyber Working Group, and with a community of other financial intelligence units. We host speakers, discuss current trends, and provide information on FinCEN resources and authorities as we work with our partners in an effort to foster an open line of communication across the government regarding bad actors involved in virtual currency and cyber-related crime.
Finally, FinCEN has shared its strategic analysis on money laundering through virtual currency with executives at many of our partner law enforcement and regulatory agencies, and foreign financial intelligence units, as well as with U.S. government policy makers.
Outreach to the Virtual Currency Industry
 
RecognizingRecognizing that the new, expanded definition of money transmission would bring new financial entities under the purview of FinCEN’s regulatory framework, shortly after the publication of the interpretive guidance and as part of FinCEN’s ongoing commitment to engage in dialogue with the financial industry and continually learn more about the industries that we regulate, FinCEN announced its interest in holding outreach meetings with representatives from the virtual currency industry. The meetings are designed to hear feedback on the implications of recent regulatory responsibilities imposed on this industry, and to receive industry’s input on where additional guidance would be helpful to facilitate compliance.
We held the first such meeting with representatives of the Bitcoin Foundation on August 26, 2013 at FinCEN’s Washington, DC offices and included attendees from a cross-section of the law enforcement and regulatory communities. This outreach was part of FinCEN’s overall efforts to increase knowledge and understanding of the regulated industry and how its members are impacted by regulations, and thereby help FinCEN most efficiently and effectively work with regulated entities to further the common goals of the detection and deterrence of financial crime. To further capitalize on this important dialogue and exchange of ideas, FinCEN has invited the Bitcoin Foundation to provide a similar presentation at the next plenary of the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group (BSAAG) scheduled for mid-December. The BSAAG is a Congressionally-chartered forum that brings together representatives from the financial industry, law enforcement, and the regulatory community to advise FinCEN on the functioning of our AML/CFT regime.
Conclusion
 
The Administration has made appropriate oversight of the virtual currency industry a priority, and as a result, FinCEN’s efforts in this regard have increased significantly over recent years through targeted regulatory measures, outreach to regulatory and law enforcement counterparts and our partners in the private sector, and the development of expertise. We are very encouraged by the progress we have made thus far. We are dedicated to continuing to build on these accomplishments by remaining focused on future trends in the virtual currency industry and how they may inform potential changes to our regulatory framework for the future. Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.



Content



20131118.pdf359.92 KB

Before the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs
November 18, 2013



Chairman Carper, Ranking Member Coburn, and distinguished Members of the Committee, I am Jennifer Shasky Calvery, Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), and I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss FinCEN’s ongoing role in the Administration’s efforts to establish a meaningful regulatory framework for virtual currencies that intersect with the U.S. financial system. We appreciate the Committee’s interest in this important issue, and your continued support of our efforts to prevent illicit financial activity from exploiting potential gaps in our regulatory structure as technological advances create new and innovative ways to move money. I am also pleased to be testifying with my colleagues from the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security. Both play an important role in the global fight against money laundering and terrorist financing, and our collaboration on these issues greatly enhances the effectiveness of our efforts.
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities. FinCEN works to achieve its mission through a broad range of interrelated strategies, including:
Administering the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) - the United States’ primary anti-money laundering (AML)/counter-terrorist financing (CFT) regulatory regime;
Sharing the rich financial intelligence we collect, as well as our analysis and expertise, with law enforcement, intelligence, and regulatory partners; and,
Building global cooperation and technical expertise among financial intelligence units throughout the world.
To accomplish these activities, FinCEN employs a team comprised of approximately 340 dedicated employees with a broad range of expertise in illicit finance, financial intelligence, the financial industry, the AML/CFT regulatory regime, technology, and enforcement. We also leverage our close relationships with regulatory, law enforcement, international, and industry partners to increase our collective insight and better protect the U.S. financial system.
What is Virtual Currency?
 
Before moving into a discussion of FinCEN’s role in ensuring we have smart regulation for virtual currency that is not too burdensome but also protects the U.S. financial system from illicit use, let me set the stage with some of the definitions we are using at FinCEN to understand virtual currency and the various types present in the market today. Virtual currency is a medium of exchange that operates like a currency in some environments but does not have all the attributes of real currency. In particular, virtual currency does not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction. A convertible virtual currency either has an equivalent value in real currency, or acts as a substitute for real currency. In other words, it is a virtual currency that can be exchanged for real currency. At FinCEN, we have focused on two types of convertible virtual currencies: centralized and decentralized.
Centralized virtual currencies have a centralized repository and a single administrator. Liberty Reserve, which FinCEN identified earlier this year as being of primary money laundering concern pursuant to Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act, is an example of a centralized virtual currency. Decentralized virtual currencies, on the other hand, and as the name suggests, have no central repository and no single administrator. Instead, value is electronically transmitted between parties without an intermediary. Bitcoin is an example of a decentralized virtual currency. Bitcoin is also known as cryptocurrency, meaning that it relies on cryptographic software protocols to generate the currency and validate transactions.
There are a variety of methods an individual user might employ to obtain, spend, and then “cash out” either a centralized or decentralized virtual currency. The following illustration shows a typical series of transactions in a centralized virtual currency, such as Liberty Reserve:

By way of comparison, the next illustration shows a very similar series of transactions in a decentralized virtual currency such as Bitcoin:

From a “follow the money” standpoint, the main difference between these two series of transactions is the absence of an “administrator” serving as intermediary in the case of Bitcoin. This difference does have significance in FinCEN’s regulatory approach to virtual currency, and that approach will be addressed further during the course of my testimony today.
Money Laundering Vulnerabilities in Virtual Currencies
 
Any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering or terrorist financing. Virtual currency is not different in this regard. As with all parts of the financial system, though, FinCEN seeks to understand the specific attributes that make virtual currency vulnerable to illicit use, so that we can both employ a smart regulatory approach and encourage industry to develop mitigating features in its products.
Some of the following reasons an illicit actor might decide to use a virtual currency to store and transfer value are the same reasons that legitimate users have, while other reasons are more nefarious. Specifically, an illicit actor may choose to use virtually currency because it:
Enables the user to remain relatively anonymous;
Is relatively simple for the user to navigate;
May have low fees;
Is accessible across the globe with a simple Internet connection;
Can be used both to store value and make international transfers of value;
Does not typically have transaction limits;
Is generally secure;
Features irrevocable transactions;
Depending on the system, may have been created with the intent (and added features) to facilitate money laundering;
If it is decentralized, has no administrator to maintain information on users and report suspicious activity to governmental authorities;
Can exploit weaknesses in the anti-money laundering/counter terrorist financing (AML/CFT) regimes of various jurisdictions, including international disparities in, and a general lack of, regulations needed to effectively support the prevention and detection of money laundering and terrorist financing.
Because any financial institution, payment system, or medium of exchange has the potential to be exploited for money laundering, fighting such illicit use requires consistent regulation across the financial system. Virtual currency is not different from other financial products and services in this regard. What is important is that financial institutions that deal in virtual currency put effective AML/CFT controls in place to harden themselves from becoming the targets of illicit actors that would exploit any identified vulnerabilities.
Indeed, the idea that illicit actors might exploit the vulnerabilities of virtual currency to launder money is not merely theoretical. We have seen both centralized and decentralized virtual currencies exploited by illicit actors. Liberty Reserve used its centralized virtual currency as part of an alleged $6 billion money laundering operation purportedly used by criminal organizations engaged in credit card fraud, identity theft, investment fraud, computer hacking, narcotics trafficking, and child pornography. One Liberty Reserve co-founder has already pleaded guilty to money laundering in the scheme. And just recently, the Department of Justice has alleged that customers of Silk Road, the largest narcotic and contraband marketplace on the Internet to date, were required to pay in bitcoins to enable both the operator of Silk Road and its sellers to evade detection and launder hundreds of millions of dollars. With money laundering activity already valued in the billions of dollars, virtual currency is certainly worthy of FinCEN’s attention.
That being said, it is also important to put virtual currency in perspective as a payment system. The U.S. government indictment and proposed special measures against Liberty Reserve allege it was involved in laundering more than $6 billion. Administrators of other major centralized virtual currencies report processing similar transaction volumes to what Liberty Reserve did. In the case of Bitcoin, it has been publicly reported that its users processed transactions worth approximately $8 billion over the twelve-month period preceding October 2013; however, this measure may be artificially high due to the extensive use of automated layering in many Bitcoin transactions. By way of comparison, according to information reported publicly, in 2012 Bank of America processed $244.4 trillion in wire transfers, PayPal processed approximately $145 billion in online payments, Western Union made remittances totaling approximately $81 billion, the Automated Clearing House (ACH) Network processed more than 21 billion transactions with a total dollar value of $36.9 trillion, and Fedwire, which handles large-scale wholesale transfers, processed 132 million transactions for a total of $599 trillion. This relative volume of transactions becomes important when you consider that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the best estimate for the amount of all global criminal proceeds available for laundering through the financial system in 2009 was $1.6 trillion. While of growing concern, to date, virtual currencies have yet to overtake more traditional methods to move funds internationally, whether for legitimate or criminal purposes.
Mitigating Money Laundering Vulnerabilities in Virtual Currencies
 
FinCEN’s main goal in administering the BSA is to ensure the integrity and transparency of the U.S. financial system so that money laundering and terrorist financing can be prevented and, where it does occur, be detected for follow on action. One of our biggest challenges is striking the right balance between the costs and benefits of regulation. One strategy we use to address this challenge is to promote consistency, where possible, in our regulatory framework across different parts of the financial services industry. It ensures a level playing field for industry and minimizes gaps in our AML/CFT coverage.
Recognizing the emergence of new payment methods and the potential for abuse by illicit actors, FinCEN began working with our law enforcement and regulatory partners several years ago to study the issue. We understood that AML protections must keep pace with the emergence of new payment systems, such as virtual currency and prepaid cards, lest those innovations become a favored tool of illicit actors. In July 2011, after a public comment period designed to receive feedback from industry, FinCEN released two rules that update several definitions and provide the needed flexibility to accommodate innovation in the payment systems space under our preexisting regulatory framework. Those rules are: (1) Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Money Services Businesses; and (2) Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Prepaid Access.
The updated definitions reflect FinCEN’s earlier guidance and rulings, as well as current business operations in the industry. As such, they have been able to accommodate the development of new payment systems, including virtual currency. Specifically, the new rule on money services businesses added the phrase “other value that substitutes for currency” to the definition of “money transmission services.” And since a convertible virtual currency either has an equivalent value in real currency, or acts a substitute for real currency, it qualifies as “other value that substitutes for currency” under the definition of “money transmission services.” A person that provides money transmission services is a “money transmitter,” a type of money services business already covered by the AML/CFT protections in the BSA.
As a follow-up to the regulations and in an effort to provide additional clarity on the compliance expectations for those actors involved in virtual currency transactions subject to FinCEN oversight, on March 18, 2013, FinCEN supplemented its money services business regulations with interpretive guidance designed to clarify the applicability of the regulations implementing the BSA to persons creating, obtaining, distributing, exchanging, accepting, or transmitting virtual currencies. In the simplest of terms, FinCEN’s guidance explains that administrators or exchangers of virtual currencies must register with FinCEN, and institute certain recordkeeping, reporting and AML program control measures, unless an exception to these requirements applies. The guidance also explains that those who use virtual currencies exclusively for common personal transactions like buying goods or services online are users, not subject to regulatory requirements under the BSA. In all cases, FinCEN employs an activity-based test to determine when someone dealing with virtual currency qualifies as a money transmitter. The guidance clarifies definitions and expectations to ensure that businesses engaged in such activities are aware of their regulatory responsibilities, including registering appropriately. Furthermore, FinCEN closely coordinates with its state regulatory counterparts to encourage appropriate application of FinCEN guidance as part of the states’ separate AML compliance oversight of financial institutions.
It is in the best interest of virtual currency providers to comply with these regulations for a number of reasons. First is the idea of corporate responsibility. Legitimate financial institutions, including virtual currency providers, do not go into business with the aim of laundering money on behalf of criminals. Virtual currencies are a financial service, and virtual currency administrators and exchangers are financial institutions. As I stated earlier, any financial institution could be exploited for money laundering purposes. What is important is for institutions to put controls in place to deal with those money laundering threats, and to meet their AML reporting obligations.
At the same time, being a good corporate citizen and complying with regulatory responsibilities is good for a company’s bottom line. Every financial institution needs to be concerned about its reputation and show that it is operating with transparency and integrity within the bounds of the law. Legitimate customers will be drawn to a virtual currency or administrator or exchanger where they know their money is safe and where they know the company has a reputation for integrity. And banks will want to provide services to administrators or exchangers that show not only great innovation, but also great integrity and transparency.
The decision to bring virtual currency within the scope of our regulatory framework should be viewed by those who respect and obey the basic rule of law as a positive development for this sector. It recognizes the innovation virtual currencies provide, and the benefits they might offer society. Several new payment methods in the financial sector have proven their capacity to empower customers, encourage the development of innovative financial products, and expand access to financial services. We want these advances to continue. However, those institutions that choose to act outside of their AML obligations and outside of the law have and will continue to be held accountable. FinCEN will do everything in its regulatory power to stop such abuses of the U.S. financial system.
As previously mentioned, earlier this year, FinCEN identified Liberty Reserve as a financial institution of primary money laundering concern under Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act. Liberty Reserve operated as an online, virtual currency, money transfer system conceived and operated specifically to allow – and encourage – illicit use because of the anonymity it offered. It was deliberately designed to avoid regulatory scrutiny and tailored its services to illicit actors looking to launder their ill-gotten gains. According to the allegations contained in a related criminal action brought by the U.S. Department of Justice, those illicit actors included criminal organizations engaged in credit card fraud, identity theft, investment fraud, computer hacking, narcotics trafficking, and child pornography, just to name a few. The 311 action taken by FinCEN was designed to restrict the ability of Liberty Reserve to access the U.S. financial system, publicly notify the international financial community of the risks posed by Liberty Reserve, and to send a resounding message to other offshore money launderers that such abuse of the U.S. financial system will not be tolerated and their activity can be reached through our targeted financial measures.
Sharing Our Knowledge and Expertise on Virtual Currency
 
As the financial intelligence unit for the United States, FinCEN must stay current on how money is being laundered in the United States, including through new and emerging payment systems, so that we can share this expertise with our many law enforcement, regulatory, industry, and foreign financial intelligence unit partners, and effectively serve as the cornerstone of this country’s AML/CFT regime. FinCEN has certainly sought to meet this responsibility with regard to virtual currency and its exploitation by illicit actors. In doing so, we have drawn and continue to draw from the knowledge we have gained through our regulatory efforts, use of targeted financial measures, analysis of the financial intelligence we collect, independent study of virtual currency, outreach to industry, and collaboration with our many partners in law enforcement.
In the same month we issued our guidance on virtual currency, March 2013, FinCEN also issued a Networking Bulletin on crypto-currencies to provide a more granular explanation of this highly complex industry to law enforcement and assist it in following the money as it funnels between virtual currency channels and the U.S. financial system. Among other things, the bulletin addresses the role of traditional banks, money transmitters, and exchangers that come into play as intermediaries by enabling users to fund the purchase of virtual currencies and exchange virtual currencies for other types of currency. It also highlights known records processes associated with virtual currencies and the potential value these records may offer to investigative officials. The bulletin has been in high demand since its publication and the feedback regarding its tremendous value has come from the entire spectrum of our law enforcement partners. In fact, demand for more detailed information on crypto-currencies has been so high that we have also shared it with several of our regulatory and foreign financial intelligence unit partners.
One feature of a FinCEN Networking Bulletin is that it asks the readers to provide ongoing feedback on what they are learning through their investigations so that we can create a forum to quickly learn of new developments, something particularly important with a new payment method. Based on what we are learning through this forum and other means, FinCEN has issued several analytical products of a tactical nature to inform law enforcement operations.
Equally important to our ongoing efforts to deliver expertise to our law enforcement partners is FinCEN’s engagement with our regulatory counterparts to ensure they are kept apprised of the latest trends in virtual currencies and the potential vulnerabilities they pose to traditional financial institutions under their supervision. FinCEN uses its collaboration with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) BSA Working Group as a platform to review and discuss FinCEN’s regulations and guidance, and the most recent and relevant trends in virtual currencies. One such example occurred just recently, when several FinCEN virtual currency experts gave a comprehensive presentation on the topic to an audience of Federal and state bank examiners at an FFIEC Payment Systems Risk Conference. The presentation covered an overview of virtual currency operations, FinCEN’s guidance on the application of FinCEN regulations to virtual currency, enforcement actions, and ongoing industry outreach efforts.
FinCEN also participates in the FBI-led Virtual Currency Emerging Threats Working Group, the FDIC-led Cyber Fraud Working Group, the Terrorist Financing & Financial Crimes-led Treasury Cyber Working Group, and with a community of other financial intelligence units. We host speakers, discuss current trends, and provide information on FinCEN resources and authorities as we work with our partners in an effort to foster an open line of communication across the government regarding bad actors involved in virtual currency and cyber-related crime.
Finally, FinCEN has shared its strategic analysis on money laundering through virtual currency with executives at many of our partner law enforcement and regulatory agencies, and foreign financial intelligence units, as well as with U.S. government policy makers.
Outreach to the Virtual Currency Industry
 
Recognizing that the new, expanded definition of money transmission would bring new financial entities under the purview of FinCEN’s regulatory framework, shortly after the publication of the interpretive guidance and as part of FinCEN’s ongoing commitment to engage in dialogue with the financial industry and continually learn more about the industries that we regulate, FinCEN announced its interest in holding outreach meetings with representatives from the virtual currency industry. The meetings are designed to hear feedback on the implications of recent regulatory responsibilities imposed on this industry, and to receive industry’s input on where additional guidance would be helpful to facilitate compliance.
We held the first such meeting with representatives of the Bitcoin Foundation on August 26, 2013 at FinCEN’s Washington, DC offices and included attendees from a cross-section of the law enforcement and regulatory communities. This outreach was part of FinCEN’s overall efforts to increase knowledge and understanding of the regulated industry and how its members are impacted by regulations, and thereby help FinCEN most efficiently and effectively work with regulated entities to further the common goals of the detection and deterrence of financial crime. To further capitalize on this important dialogue and exchange of ideas, FinCEN has invited the Bitcoin Foundation to provide a similar presentation at the next plenary of the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group (BSAAG) scheduled for mid-December. The BSAAG is a Congressionally-chartered forum that brings together representatives from the financial industry, law enforcement, and the regulatory community to advise FinCEN on the functioning of our AML/CFT regime.
Conclusion
 
The Administration has made appropriate oversight of the virtual currency industry a priority, and as a result, FinCEN’s efforts in this regard have increased significantly over recent years through targeted regulatory measures, outreach to regulatory and law enforcement counterparts and our partners in the private sector, and the development of expertise. We are very encouraged by the progress we have made thus far. We are dedicated to continuing to build on these accomplishments by remaining focused on future trends in the virtual currency industry and how they may inform potential changes to our regulatory framework for the future. Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.



Content



20130416.pdf140.87 KB

NATIONAL CYBER-FORENSICS TRAINING ALLIANCE CYFIN 2013 CONFERENCE
PITTSBURGH, PA
April 16, 2013



Good morning. I want to start by thanking our hosts, THE NCFTA, for the opportunity to join you at this year’s CyFin Conference.
For those of you that might not be familiar with the work being done at the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, known as FinCEN, I wanted to spend just these first few minutes giving you a broad overview of our agency, as well as the information that we use to do our work.
FinCEN is a part of the Treasury Department, and reports to the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. With approximately 300 employees, we are relatively small considering our broad responsibilities. FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.
FinCEN carries out this mission by receiving and maintaining certain financial transactions data; analyzing and disseminating those data for law enforcement purposes; and building global cooperation with counterpart organizations in other countries.
So, where does FinCEN get its data? Another key aspect of FinCEN’s mission is to administer and issue regulations pursuant to the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The BSA requires a broad range of U.S. financial institutions, which includes traditional depository institutions, money services business, such as Western Union, Money Gram, and PayPal, casinos and some card clubs, insurance companies, securities and futures brokers, precious metals/jewelry industry, and some trades or business, like car dealerships, to assist U.S. government agencies in the detection and prevention of money laundering. Financial institutions do this by maintaining records and filing reports with FinCEN.
The two primary reports FinCEN collects from financial institutions are Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) and Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs). CTRs must be filed on all cash transactions exceeding $10,000. In 2012, there were over 14 million CTRs filed by financial institutions around the country.
SARs are reports of suspicious transactions. While the dollar thresholds differ slightly by industry, generally speaking, if a financial institution “knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect” that any transaction or attempted transaction is suspicious, and the transaction or attempted transaction involves or aggregates to funds of $5,000 or more, a SAR is required. Last year, 1.4 million SARs were filed with FinCEN.
Overall, FinCEN’s BSA data includes nearly 190 million records with approximately 16 million records added each year. Without the financial institutions that report this information, FinCEN literally could not do its job. Their role is vital in our efforts to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering, and promote national security.
FinCEN is a leader in the analysis of BSA data and financial intelligence. Our advanced analytic tools and highly skilled analysts play a unique role in analyzing and integrating BSA data and other information to ultimately accomplish three ends: (1) map illicit finance networks; (2) identify compromised financial institutions and jurisdictions; and (3) understand the current methods and schemes for illicit finance. These three key pieces of analysis are critical to enable our stakeholders – law enforcement, regulators, foreign partners, and industry – to take action against money laundering, terrorist financing, and cyber threats.
FinCEN’s analysis depends primarily on the excellent information financial institutions provide – it is the baseline from which our analysts work. What our analysts do now – and do very well – is look across those data to find interconnections to support ongoing law enforcement cases, to find trends and patterns within those data, and to understand the overall changes and shifts within them. They also combine those findings with other information sources, such as law enforcement data or publicly available data, and enhance the picture.
Where our analysts are going – and we’re not there yet, but we are on the cusp of these capabilities – is to take our analysis to a whole new level. Currently, we are capable of dissecting law enforcement and BSA information to identify a specific methodology for illicit finance in a particular segment of the financial industry related to a particular type of crime. We are also capable of using such information to identify entirely new and unknown bad actors engaged in similar activity in other parts of the country.
However, right now this is long and arduous work as analysts sift through hundreds and sometimes thousands of reports. Very soon, new capacities made possible by our internal technology modernization will allow our analysts to deal with such data sets to find leads in a fraction of the time previously necessary. Very soon, we will be able to point law enforcement and other stakeholders precisely to where they should be looking. Our analysts, working hand-in-hand with our superb technology team, are now putting these new capacities into place.
Having seen the initial results from our new capabilities, I am excited about where we are headed. I am committed to making this a central role for FinCEN in the 21st Century. So today, I’d like to talk to you about some of the work we are doing, and where our cutting-edge analytical efforts are taking us, as we seek to remain out in front of emerging payment systems and use our advanced analytical capabilities to combat cyber threats.
Emerging Payment Systems
I’d like to begin today by discussing how FinCEN’s analysts are working hard to stay ahead of the curve in understanding emerging payment systems and related financial flows and vulnerabilities and to put that information into the hands of those customers who need it most.
As we all know, during the past decade, the development of new market space and new types of payment systems have emerged as alternatives to traditional mechanisms for conducting financial transactions, allowing developing countries to reach beyond underdeveloped infrastructure and reach those populations who previously had no access to banking services. For consumers and businesses alike, the development and proliferation of these systems are a significant continuing source of positive impact on global commerce.
These new systems have also expanded the boundaries of “money transmission” as more sophisticated payment systems have become available. And the inherent added complexity of these systems opens them to potential misuse by criminals.
FinCEN’s analysts are continually working to understand the schemes and methods used to exploit emerging payment methods for money laundering and terrorist financing, and to develop related guidance for law enforcement. This guidance provides law enforcement with information on key sectors’ operations, recordkeeping practices, and efforts to identify and counter vulnerabilities.
Partnership is crucial. As our analysts develop their understanding of these new systems, they are significantly aided by working directly with the financial industry. This partnership enables them to better follow financial trails and realistically understand financial mechanisms.
Crypto-Currencies
For instance, FinCEN’s analysts just recently finalized a bulletin that explores the relatively new payment technology of digital currency systems. FinCEN’s bulletin helps “de-mystify” the digital currency realm by explaining to the broader law enforcement community how these systems work. The bulletin also addresses the role of traditional financial institutions as intermediaries for these new payment methods.
We’re viewing our analytic work in this space as an important part of an ongoing conversation between industry and law enforcement. While probably most of today’s audience understands what these emerging payments systems are and how they work, many line analysts, investigators, and prosecutors in law enforcement may not, and part of FinCEN’s role is to help be the bridge to explain these new systems. FinCEN is dedicated to learning more about digital currency systems, along with other emerging mechanisms, to protect those systems from abuse and to aid law enforcement in ensuring that they are getting the leads and information they need to prosecute the criminal actors. As our knowledge base develops, in concert with you, we will look to leverage our new capabilities to identify trends and patterns among the interconnection points of the traditional financial sector and these new payment systems.
In addition to developing products to help law enforcement follow the financial trails of emerging payments methods, FinCEN also develops guidance for the financial industry to clarify their regulatory responsibilities as they relate to emerging areas.
Virtual Currencies
In fact, just last month, FinCEN issued interpretive guidance to clarify the applicability of BSA regulations to virtual currencies, such as Bitcoin, which has in recent weeks gained significant attention. The guidance responds to questions raised by financial institutions, law enforcement, and regulators concerning the regulatory treatment of persons who use virtual currencies or make a business of exchanging, accepting, and transmitting them.
FinCEN’s rules define certain businesses or individuals as money services businesses (MSBs) depending on the nature of their financial activities. MSBs have registration requirements and a range of anti-money laundering, recordkeeping, and reporting responsibilities under FinCEN’s regulations. The guidance considers the use of virtual currencies from the perspective of several categories within FinCEN’s definition of MSBs.
The guidance explains how FinCEN’s “money transmitter” definition applies to certain exchangers and system administrators of virtual currencies depending on the facts and circumstances of that activity. Those who use virtual currencies exclusively for common personal transactions like receiving payments for services or buying goods online are not affected by this guidance.
Those who are intermediaries in the transfer of virtual currencies from one person to another person, or to another location, are money transmitters that must register with FinCEN as MSBs unless an exception applies. Some virtual currency exchangers have already registered with FinCEN as MSBs, though they have not necessarily identified themselves as money transmitters. The guidance clarifies definitions and expectations to ensure that businesses engaged in similar activities are aware of their regulatory responsibilities and that all who need to, register appropriately.
Uncovering Cyber Trends and Patterns
FinCEN depends on the information financial institutions provide to us, and today I’d like to focus on what our analysts do with that information. In addition to providing case support, some of you may know that FinCEN has, for many years, carried out trends and pattern analyses of the information contained in the millions of SARs and CTRs that financial institutions send to FinCEN annually.
Account Takeovers
For instance, as an example of our tactical case support, a FinCEN analyst recently provided analytical case support to a federal law enforcement agency on an international cybercrime investigation. The investigation involved the use of computer intrusion techniques and malware to facilitate the unauthorized transfer of funds from legitimate small business accounts to “temporary accounts” created solely for this purpose and subsequently closed or abandoned after the illicit activity was conducted. There were more than 50 attempted transfers over a four month period, including more than two dozen successful transfers resulting in the theft of almost $850,000. The suspects used multiple banks and accounts and targeted several small businesses ranging from a law firm to a landscaping company. Financial institutions filed more than 40 SARs and 20 CTRs detailing the illicit activity and movement of funds. Based on this information, the analyst was able to identify what appeared to be a network of individuals with connections to Russia and Eastern Europe involved in the cybercrime scheme.
We all know that account takeovers via Zeus or other malware have been plaguing victims and financial institutions for years. This is an area where I know there are opportunities for FinCEN to contribute and for us all to work together. While FinCEN issued an advisory on this issue in 2011, we must continue to head in a direction analytically where we will be able to identify trends and indicators, as well as actual targets, within the BSA data. What is exciting about this is that there is a real opportunity to harness our analytical capabilities to undermine account takeovers. In addition, we recognize that our data, though a key piece of the puzzle, are not the whole of the picture – we are looking forward to working with partners in law enforcement and industry to tackle the increasing costs of cyberfraud.
Third Party Payment Processors
FinCEN has also been working to identify and address the risks associated with third-party payment processors (TPPPs). While many third party payment processors provide legitimate payment transactions for reputable clients, we have also seen significant criminal activity involving TPPPs. This includes fraud, money laundering, identity theft, and other illicit transactions, including in particular schemes to facilitate spam-based marketing schemes, for example for pharmaceuticals. TPPPs deserve scrutiny because cybercriminals rely on them to get paid, making them a crucial node in the cybercrime business model, and because they may be more amenable to regulatory and enforcement efforts than other segments of that model, for example individual cybercriminals, corporations, and suppliers of goods or services. Targeting TPPPs also can lead us to the banks that are complicit in cybercrime, and such institutions are highly vulnerable and deserving of enforcement action.
Of course, the risks associated with individual TPPPs vary significantly depending on the make-up of the customer base. For example, Payment Processors providing consumer transactions on behalf of telemarketing and Internet merchants may present a higher risk profile to a financial institution than would other businesses. Telemarketing and Internet sales and transactions involving remotely created checks (RCC) also tend to have a higher occurrence of consumer fraud. These customer relationships can pose increased risk to institutions and may require careful due diligence and monitoring.
FinCEN issued an Advisory last October to alert financial institutions of the roles certain unscrupulous processors continue to play to commit or facilitate a range of criminal activities. Our review of a small group of BSA filings since the October Advisory shows these illicit activities, which often also involved the participation of banks, money services businesses, shell corporations, and a wide-range of Web site-hosting and/or support entities located in the United States and about 27 other countries.
Many of the errant TPPPs reportedly stole funds directly from consumer financial accounts through their initiation of unauthorized ACH debits or RCCs, often made possible through computer intrusion and identity theft. Others facilitated the collection and/or layering of illicit funds generated on Web sites touting Internet gambling, child pornography, pharmaceuticals, and investment scams. Some filers also reported smaller, mainly foreign-based, TPPPs that used larger independent exchange providers to clear payments to individuals and merchants who offered products and services on the Internet.
Many of these merchants failed to receive payment and were left with the difficult task of trying to determine which processor actually stole their funds. Within the group of BSA filings read, we identified millions of dollars in wire transfers to or from Internet-based companies in the United States and countries known for child exploitation, human trafficking, illicit pornography, illegal diamond trading, and tax avoidance.
We will continue to work in close partnership with our financial industry and law enforcement partners to raise awareness of this ongoing activity.
Advanced Analytics
While FinCEN has had much success in the analytical area, we do face our share of technical challenges to produce timely, cogent, and actionable intelligence products, useful to both our policy leaders and to field personnel. Filing protocols and the data within FinCEN reports vary from form to form, particularly with respect to those forms filed by individuals, as opposed to financial institutions.
Because of these variances, FinCEN analysts must find innovative solutions to match and fuse data as part of their mapping of illicit finance networks, identification of compromised financial institutions and jurisdictions, and understanding of schemes and methods for illicit finance.
In the very recent past, our analysts often needed to develop ad hoc tools to help analyze the data because our technical backbone was unable to sufficiently support the layers of tasks required to query, download, integrate, sort, connect, and chart the data.
Last fall, FinCEN began rolling out a key component in our IT Modernization Program to improve upon our ability to conduct analysis and make the BSA data available to a large number of federal and state agencies, including law enforcement and regulators. FinCEN Query allows users to easily access, query, and analyze 11 years of BSA data – more than 180 million reports. The system allows users to apply filters to narrow search results and utilize enhanced data capabilities. Our users are now able to look at the information more comprehensively, and we are excited to work with them in making sure that filings become more valuable than ever before in this new system.
To give you an idea of the value of the information financial institutions provide, in the months since FinCEN Query went live last September, there have been over 1.3 million queries of the BSA data by more than 7,000 users. This past Thursday alone, there were over 16,000 queries of the BSA data through FinCEN Query.
With our technology advancements, we are now getting closer to being able to leverage predictive analytics to take our work even further. This will provide us with the ability to work with our law enforcement partners, review their top completed investigations, understand the money laundering indicators present in our data, parse through the existing BSA forms, and then develop automated business rules that will allow us to provide agencies with new leads indicative of similar illicit activity elsewhere.
For example, FinCEN is working towards developing business rules based on information provided by our law enforcement and regulatory partners. Our goal is to dive deeper into aggregated regional and state level data to extract underlying drivers and trends between and among regions. We are doing this by automating the detection of regions and industries with significant changes, reviewing BSA records, and drilling down to understand which financial institutions are on the front lines of seeing changes in trends and patterns.
Moving forward, we expect to use the strategic application of business rules on the data industry provides to not only detect, but also to “predict” where certain types of cyber crime, may be taking place and to cut off this activity before if begins.
This type of predictive analysis will significantly improve our intelligence and enforcement efforts by allowing us to focus on those vulnerable regions or financial sectors where money laundering or financial crimes are most prevalent. Furthermore, it will allow us to provide new leads to law enforcement, alert our regulatory partners, and develop “red flags” for industry so we can provide feedback on the kind of information that would be helpful in their SAR reporting.
We are beginning to touch the very early parts of this capability; we are very excited to be heading in this direction and I greatly look forward to seeing the products when we are able to reach full implementation.
Without strong public-private partnerships, none of the work we are doing would be possible. So, I’d like to close-out my remarks today discussing our efforts in this area.
Public-Private Partnerships
The NCFTA clearly recognizes that to combat an issue as complex as cyber fraud, you must engage with partners on all fronts. The CyFin Initiative, which brings industry, law enforcement, and academia together to share information addressing cyber threats aimed at the financial services industry, is key. I could not agree more strongly with this approach, and have made fostering strong public-private partnerships a cornerstone of my efforts as Director of FinCEN.
The Delta Team
One of my first initiatives upon arriving at FinCEN last fall was to being looking at how we could form stronger partnerships with our industry, regulatory, and law enforcement partners. We know financial institutions spend a great deal of time and money to comply with the BSA. And while I know it is worth it, we need to ask ourselves if the money is being spent in the right ways and ask ourselves hard questions. How does compliance risk compare with the actual illicit financing risk? What is the delta between the two?
Fortunately, FinCEN has a productive forum in which to have these discussions. The Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group, or BSAAG, is comprised of high-level representatives from financial institutions, federal law enforcement agencies, regulatory authorities, and others from the private and public sectors. We meet twice a year to discuss issues relating to the administration of the BSA and to make policy recommendations to the Secretary of the Treasury.
The purpose of the Delta Team is for industry, regulators, and law enforcement to come together and examine the space between compliance risks and illicit financing risks. The goal is to reduce the variance between the two. To the extent we are successful, we will be building a smarter, more effective, and more cost efficient system. If we are successful we will have our eyes squarely on the ball, protecting our financial system from illicit finance and combating serious criminal and national security threats.
The Delta Team held its first meeting in February in FinCEN’s Washington, D.C. offices. We had a very productive first meeting, with an exchange of views on risks and the beginning of discussions on practical steps that address these risks
As part of this meeting, which consisted of a broad cross-section of industry, regulators, and law enforcement agencies, we facilitated discussions among smaller breakout groups aligned by industry sector. One thing in particular that I found striking was that although these industry breakout sessions provided a forum to raise and discuss industry-specific concerns and ideas, there was a lot of consistency in the themes raised by the different financial industry components.
A common theme from participants was that additional information on money laundering trends, including more specifics on schemes and methods for illicit finance and red flags, would be helpful in aligning industry efforts with law enforcement priorities. For those of you who are not aware, FinCEN puts out advisories to financial institutions that contain information on different schemes and methods for illicit finance and red flags for which financial institutions should be on the lookout. When done well, these advisories drive reporting, which in turn enables FinCEN to use its advanced analytics to provide additional and, hopefully, even better analysis for law enforcement and other stakeholders.
Another common theme that arose from the Delta Team meetings -- and something at which I believe the NCFTA is already quite good -- is the need to find ways for more dynamic, real-time information sharing by and between financial institutions, and also with FinCEN and law enforcement. The Patriot Act provides certain safe harbors for financial institutions to engage in such sharing of information, but I believe the prevalent view is that the current mechanisms for doing so are overly clunky and bureaucratic. Through the Delta Team we are considering ways to achieve the dynamic, real-time sharing that we all see is necessary to combat today's criminal and national security threats.
I look forward to continuing these valuable discussions in order to identify meaningful actions for FinCEN and other agencies to consider over the coming months.
International Partnerships
In the intelligence area, FinCEN also plays a role in fostering strong public/private partnerships. Here too, FinCEN serves as global experts on illicit finance, providing data-driven tactical and strategic perspectives and engaging our international partners to disrupt threats to the U.S. financial system. FinCEN serves as the Financial Intelligence Unit, or FIU, for the United States. But the United States is just one member of the Egmont Group of Intelligence Units, a group of 131 FIUs located around the world.
These 130 FIUs are important partners to FinCEN. While each FIU is a bit different in terms of organization and responsibilities, all Egmont-member FIUs commit to serve as a national, central authority that receives and analyzes disclosures of financial information, particularly suspicious transaction reports, and disseminates the results of the analysis to combat money laundering and terrorist financing.
The unique role that FinCEN plays in this space is that we serve as a conduit for information flow between U.S. law enforcement and each of these 130 jurisdictions. And when it comes to the cyber area, our ability to open the door to information that law enforcement could otherwise not access, can pay great dividends. Just as FinCEN receives a large amount of valuable reporting from the private sector, each FIU receives analogous reporting from its own domestic reporting entities. Only by working collaboratively with our FIU counterparts can we find commonalities across these datasets.
Just in the past few weeks, we’ve been working with a U.S. law enforcement agency and one of our foreign counterparts to help seize approximately $1.4M USD which had been fraudulently transferred from the bank accounts of two U.S. companies as a result of computer intrusion. FinCEN passed information allowing our foreign counterpart to keep the money frozen while U.S. law enforcement begins the legal process of getting the funds repatriated to the victims. While this work remains ongoing, to date, nearly $1 million has been returned to one of the victimized businesses.
These are just a few ways that FinCEN works to build strong partnerships – in concert with you we could more fully understand the current methods and schemes for illicit finance in the cyber realm and more strongly combat shadowy illicit actors. Our combined expertise could also inform the development of predictive models to exploit the data for previously unidentified networks of illicit activity associated with cybercrime. So we hope this is just the first step in what will be an ongoing relationship.
Conclusion
My remarks today have focused extensively on the work being done by FinCEN’s analytical team – not only their ongoing efforts, but where we are heading in the future. From the time I arrived at FinCEN, I have been continually impressed by the fascinating work our analysts are doing, and even more so, by their dedication each and every day to FinCEN’s mission, and their desire to make a real difference as public servants.
As the escalation of transnational criminal threats to the U.S. financial system has increased, so too has the imperative to ensure that FinCEN is fully maximizing its potential to disrupt this activity. I am hopeful that my remarks today have given you new insight into the team at FinCEN working to respond to these threats.
But we can’t do it alone. Strong public-private partnerships are vital. That is why being here today, having the opportunity to hopefully meet with many of you throughout the day, and learn how we could better work together, is so important. Keeping this dialogue going will benefit all of us. And I am certainly committed to maximizing our ability to be effective partners and colleagues.
Thank you once again for inviting me here to speak with you today.
 



Content



20120629.pdf278.96 KB

Before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Financial Services Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit
June 29, 2012



Chairwoman Capito, Ranking Member Maloney, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, I am Jim Freis, Director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), and I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss FinCEN’s ongoing role in the Administration’s efforts to establish a meaningful regulatory framework for new payment methods entering into the financial system. We appreciate the Subcommittee’s interest in this important issue, and your continued support of our efforts to help prevent criminal abuse of the financial system and to mitigate the risk that criminals could exploit potential gaps in our regulatory structure as technological advances create new and innovative ways to move money.
FinCEN’s mission is to enhance the integrity of financial systems by facilitating the detection and deterrence of financial crime. FinCEN works to achieve its mission through a broad range of interrelated strategies, including:
Implementing, administering, and enforcing the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) - the United States’ primary anti-money laundering (AML)/counter-terrorist financing (CFT) regulatory regime;
Supporting law enforcement, intelligence, and regulatory agencies through the sharing and analysis of financial intelligence; and,
Building global cooperation and technical expertise among financial intelligence units throughout the world.
To accomplish these activities, FinCEN employs a team comprised of approximately 300 dedicated employees, including analysts, regulatory specialists, international specialists, technology experts, lawyers, administrators, managers, and Federal agents.
FinCEN’s main goal in administering the BSA is to increase the transparency of the U.S. financial system so that money laundering, terrorist financing, and other economic crime can be detected, investigated, prosecuted, and ultimately prevented. Our ability to work closely with our regulatory, law enforcement, international, and industry partners promotes consistency across our regulatory regime and better protects the U.S. financial system.
There are three generally understood stages of money laundering – placement, layering, and integration – and FinCEN’s rules for prepaid access, including mobile payments, are specifically designed to make this more difficult to occur in significant amounts without leaving a trail and with obligations on the industry to alert FinCEN of red flags. The customer identification process addresses integration, and we see reflected in the AML policies of many financial service providers controls to limit the dollar value available to single individuals both through thresholds and tracking to prevent a single individual from purchasing multiple access devices to avoid the thresholds. Part of the monitoring process that is a component of an AML program would generally include classic money laundering indicators, and this is where a knowledgeable institution will often be able to distinguish between legitimate and illicit activity, which may trigger a suspicious activity report that the government uses to determine if this is indeed an aspect of criminal activity. A careful monitoring of the links between emerging payment technologies and traditional financial services helps in mitigating the risks of all three stages of money laundering.
At the outset, I would like to confirm our understanding of the differences between mobile banking and mobile payments. While mobile banking involves communication and direction from an account holder about their account at a depository institution, mobile payments essentially involve the direction of funds outside of a bank account to effect payments or other transfers. In its seminal study about mobile phone-based financial services,1 the World Bank categorized mobile banking and mobile payment activity into four different types:
Mobile phone-based access to information about balances and transactions conducted through a financial institution (mobile banking).
Mobile phone-based access to an account established at a financial institution, to order such financial institution to conduct payments out of the established account (mobile banking).
Mobile phone-based access to an account established at a telecommunications provider, which might or might not be a financial institution, and where the account may be funded in advance or in arrears (mobile payments); note that this model exists in some foreign jurisdictions, but presently does not appear to be gaining popularity in the United States.
Mobile phone-based access to an account established at a telecommunications provider, where prepaid phone minutes themselves are used as a virtual currency (mobile payments).
Let me emphasize that each of the foregoing are subject to relevant FinCEN regulations for AML/CFT purposes, either as part of the requirements on banks applying to all of their products and services, or as part of the requirements on money transmitters, a subset of regulated “money services businesses.” While payment systems are evolving rapidly, often making leaps in functionality and connectivity within a matter of months, the aforementioned World Bank study still provides a valuable map to track the regulatory approach to the different roles mobile technology may play in the context of financial transactions. Although the World Bank study focuses on mobile financial services specifically, the same characterizations outlined above can apply with respect to mobile phones, key fobs and specialized readers, computer login over the internet, or any other means used to establish electronic communication with respect to, or to gain access to, funds. FinCEN’s regulations take a comprehensive approach in this area, focusing more on the activity at issue as opposed to the particular electronic communication vehicle. For example, with respect to the first two characterizations listed above, FinCEN has already made clear that services that only provide connectivity between a customer and the financial institution where the customer account is maintained are not separately covered by FinCEN’s regulation. Responsibility under the regulations implementing the Bank Secrecy Act falls squarely on the financial institution where the account or analogous customer relationship is located, be it a bank, a securities company, or a money services business.2
With respect to the second two characterizations, FinCEN’s regulations also have made it clear that the acceptance and transmission of currency, funds, or other value that substitutes for currency from one person and the transmission of currency, funds, or other value that substitutes for currency to another person or location, by any means, constitutes money transmission, and that any person wherever located doing business wholly or in substantial part within the United States engaging in money transmission, regardless of any other business lines the person is engaged in – such as the provision of telecommunication services – would likely be a money services business under FinCEN’s regulations, and as such must register and comply with all the reporting, recordkeeping, and monitoring requirements applicable to a money transmitter.3 Note that there is no de minimis exception for money transmitters to be subject to regulation as a money services business; this is sometimes referred to as a “zero dollar threshold.” Finally, FinCEN also has determined the obligations under its regulations that would apply to any person who sets up an arrangement involving one or more parties under a program to provide access to funds that have been paid in advance and can be retrieved or transferred through an electronic device, and to any person that participates in such prepaid access program as a Provider of prepaid access.
As FinCEN’s more extensive regulation of prepaid access providers and sellers is relatively recent, and some of its details and characteristics might not be familiar to all members of this Committee yet, let me concentrate on a brief description of the evolution of prepaid access regulation, from its inception as stored value, and its application to certain business models that might be employed by mobile payment providers.
Mitigating Money Laundering Vulnerabilities in Prepaid Access Devices
 
In dealing with prepaid access, just as is the case in approaching any financial sector, one of our biggest challenges as a regulator of financial institutions is striking the right balance between the costs and benefits of regulation. Recognizing the emergence of sophisticated payment methods and the potential for abuse by criminal actors, several years ago FinCEN began working with our law enforcement and regulatory counterparts and the industries we regulate to study the stored value/prepaid card industry in the context of expanding AML obligations to emerging payment systems. When FinCEN issued its first rule regarding money services businesses (MSBs) over a decade ago, it limited certain requirements for the prepaid or stored value arena based on varied and emerging business models, the desire to avoid inhibiting development, and other unintended consequences with respect to an industry, which at the time was in its infancy. Over time, however, it was clear that more comprehensive regulations were needed. Recognizing the importance and value of bringing a cross-section of experts together to study this issue, in May 2008, FinCEN formally established a subcommittee to focus on stored value issues within the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group (BSAAG). The BSAAG is a Congressionally-chartered forumi that brings together representatives from the financial services industry, law enforcement, and the regulatory community to advise FinCEN in its regulatory functions. The now renamed prepaid access subcommittee provides a comprehensive panel of experts available to consult on these issues and from whom a body of empirical information is gathered and exchanged. Prepaid access is attractive to customers who do not have similar easy-to-obtain options for non-cash payments or the ability to conduct transactions remotely. But the ease with which prepaid access can be obtained and used, combined with the potential for the relatively high velocity of money moving through accounts involving prepaid access, and the potential, in some cases, for anonymity could make it particularly attractive to illicit actors. Criminals value the ability to receive and distribute a significant amount of funds without being subject to many of the reporting or recordkeeping requirements that would apply to similar transactions using cash or involving an ordinary demand deposit account at a bank.
FinCEN began to take formal steps to address this industry sector – including seeking public comment on how stored value should be defined and related issues in the proposed rule, Amendment to the Bank Secrecy Act Regulations – Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Money Services Businesses.ii After we had begun efforts to revise our regulations, on May 22, 2009, President Obama signed the Credit Card Accountability, Responsibility, and Disclosure (CARD) Act of 2009.iii Section 503 of the CARD Act directed FinCEN, as administrator of the BSA, to issue regulations regarding the sale, issuance, redemption, or international transport of stored value, including prepaid devices such as plastic cards, mobile phones, electronic serial numbers, key fobs and/or other mechanisms that provide access to funds that have been paid for in advance and are retrievable and transferable. Although FinCEN had taken steps toward more comprehensive regulations for the prepaid/stored value sector before the CARD Act became law, the statute accelerated our timeframe.
After extensive study, consultation with the Department of Homeland Security and various other law enforcement and regulatory agencies, and a solicitation of public comments through a formal notice of proposed rulemaking, on July 29, 2011, FinCEN published a final regulation amending Bank Secrecy Act Regulations – Definitions and Other Regulations Relating to Prepaid Access,iv amending the money services businesses (MSB) rules and establishing more comprehensive regulations for prepaid access.
The final regulation’s most important provisions are as follows:
It renames “stored value” as “prepaid access,” without narrowing or broadening the meaning of the term, but to more aptly describe the underlying activity.
It adopts a targeted approach to regulating sellers of prepaid access products, focusing on the sale of prepaid access products whose inherent features or high dollar amounts pose heightened money laundering risks.
It excludes from the rule prepaid access products of $1,000 or less and payroll products, if they cannot be used internationally, do not permit transfers among users, and cannot be reloaded from a non-depository source.
It excludes closed loop prepaid access products that provide access to less than $2,000 on any day.
It excludes government funded and pre-tax flexible spending for health and dependent care funded prepaid access programs.
The final rule addresses regulatory gaps that have resulted from the proliferation of prepaid access innovations over the last 12 years and their increasing use as an accepted payment method. FinCEN’s prepaid access regulation also provides a balance to empower law enforcement with the information needed to attack money laundering, terrorist financing, and other illicit transactions through the financial system while preserving innovation in this rapidly growing area of consumer payments and the many legitimate uses and societal benefits offered by prepaid access. Moreover, while prepaid access is most often associated with a card, the new regulation was designed to be technology neutral to allow it to be adaptable to a range of products, such as a plastic card, an internet system, a mobile phone network, and other forms of developing technology that enable the ability to introduce and realize monetary value.
Under FinCEN’s regulation, non-bank providers of prepaid access are now subject to comprehensive requirements similar to depository institutions. The final regulation reflects FinCEN’s attempts to achieve the right balance. FinCEN believes that certain prepaid programs operate in such a way as to reduce potential money laundering threats and are therefore generally not subject to the provisions of the regulation. Such products include payroll cards, government benefits cards, health care access cards, closed loop cards, and low dollar products with strong safeguards in place.
Other risk variables – such as whether a product is reloadable, can be transferred to other consumers, or can be used to transfer funds outside the country – were all things that we identified through our extensive regulatory, law enforcement, and industry consultations. When developing the regulation, we asked the general public to help validate whether we found the right balance so that higher-risk persons and products are appropriately regulated while lower-risk products are not subject to undue regulatory obligations or constraints. For the sake of clarity, let me emphasize that a payment system allowing the transfer of funds from one mobile phone to another, such as by reference to a phone number, is subject to FinCEN’s regulations for prepaid access.
Separately, FinCEN is nearing finalization of a rule that would include the reporting of tangible prepaid access devices as part of the current requirement to report more than $10,000 in currency or monetary instruments when crossing the border.4
Subsequent Outreach to the Prepaid Access Industry
 
Shortly after the publication of the final prepaid access regulation and as part of FinCEN’s ongoing commitment to engage in dialogue with the financial industry and continually learn more about the industries that we regulate, FinCEN announced in October 2011 its interest in holding town hall meetings in its Vienna, Virginia offices with representatives from the prepaid access industry. The town halls were designed to elicit feedback on the implications of recent regulatory responsibilities imposed on this industry, and to receive industry’s input on where additional guidance would be helpful to facilitate compliance. This outreach was intended as a part of FinCEN’s overall efforts to increase knowledge and understanding of the regulated industry and how its members are affected by regulations, and thereby help FinCEN most efficiently and effectively work with regulated entities to further the common goals of the detection and deterrence of financial crime.
In response to the open invitation, FinCEN was contacted by 49 entities expressing an interest in attending the town hall meetings. Based on the information provided by the entities, FinCEN selected a representative cross-section of 16 entities that described themselves as engaging in activities that would likely fall under FinCEN’s new regulatory definition of provider of prepaid access, or that acted as service providers to banks or potential providers of prepaid access. Town halls were held on November 17 and 29, 2011. FinCEN has released a number of pieces of guidance with respect to the prepaid access regulations and anticipates that additional guidance will be forthcoming related to some of the issues raised by the industry attendees during those town halls and through other ongoing requests for clarification and guidance on the new regulations.
FinCEN’s Efforts with Respect to Mobile Payments
 
In the mobile payments universe, as noted in the World Bank study, a mobile phone can typically be used as an access device or method of communication and instruction to access accounts, initiate payment instructions, and/or notify the recipient by way of text messaging of the receipt of funds into their account. In a similar manner, so-called “mobile wallets” can be established, typically in conjunction with subscriptions to telecommunications companies, which can serve as mobile payment initiation or receipt points for customers. For some of the larger MSBs that have recently entered into the mobile payments space – such as Western Union, MoneyGram, and PayPal – the operational aspects of the actual money transfer and payment transaction segment remains similar to traditional methods of funds transfer processes facilitated by the companies, where the basic transaction flows and related recordkeeping obligations remains relatively consistent but with the mobile aspect (recipient’s mobile phone number) added to it.
As part of our ongoing support to law enforcement, FinCEN provides reference manuals to help better understand the workings of various payment mechanisms and to provide steps to utilize this understanding in specific criminal investigations, including ways to subpoena records and interpret them. One recent such manual focused on mobile payments, and we have lent FinCEN's expertise in emerging payment technologies, including mobile payments, in a range of law enforcement sensitive notices to our customers in addition to individual case support. In preparing the manual and in subsequent law enforcement outreach we have seen an interesting trend in the mobile payments industry where different telecommunication systems and/or financial mechanisms may merge and become interwoven in the same overall mobile payments transaction. For example, a customer may choose to initiate a remittance through a traditional, brick-and-mortar MSB agent location with the transaction then being processed through that MSB’s centralized internal system, and the payment of funds then going to a recipient’s mobile wallet account. Upon completion of the transaction, the recipient typically receives a text message notification on their mobile phone that indicates the funds have been credited to their mobile wallet account. The recipient also then may be able to withdraw the funds at an ATM via a debit card. This transactional overlap often provides multiple informational choke points that potentially lead to each other, which may, in turn, actually pose a benefit to law enforcement in their efforts to follow the money trails and identify other accounts and transactions associated with a given subject(s). Borrowing from procedures provided to FinCEN by one of the nation’s largest providers of mobile payment services, consider the following scenario as an illustration of how a typical transaction from the United States to the Philippines might work:
A customer goes to a domestic MSB agent facility and completes a standard money remittance form, including the recipient’s mobile number;
The funds are transferred through the MSB’s internal processing system to a recipient’s “SMART Money” account that is affiliated with a participating communications company and the account is maintained at a financial institution in the Philippines.
The recipient receives a text message notifying them that the funds are now available, at which point the recipient can then either use their mobile phone to transfer funds to another SMART Money account, reload airtime, pay bills with participating merchants, or retrieve the funds directly from an ATM through the use of a SMART Money card (similar to a debit card).
As discussed previously, FinCEN’s prepaid access regulation was specifically designed to be flexible and to accommodate new technologies as they emerge, but also to capture innovative payment methods currently used by U.S. institutions, including aspects of the scenario described above. In addition, FinCEN’s money transmitter regulations also may serve as a basis for regulating aspects of such activity. Consistent with past practice, FinCEN will interpret its regulations as they apply to various business models and provide guidance as necessary to industry with respect to the application of FinCEN’s requirements.
Conclusion
 
In the area of new payment methods, the Administration has made appropriate oversight of prepaid access products a priority, and as a result the Treasury Department’s efforts in this regard have increased significantly over recent years through targeted regulatory measures, outreach to regulatory and law enforcement counterparts and our partners in the private sector. In addition, FinCEN’s regulations in the MSB space, whether in the context of prepaid access or money transmission, can apply to select actors in the mobile payments space depending on the variety of business models that develop. We are very encouraged by the progress we have made thus far, and we are dedicated to continuing to build on these accomplishments as we chart a course for the future that encourages legitimate consumer and commercial activity to flourish, but also helps financial services providers to focus on serving their customers, not criminals. Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
 
1Integrity in Mobile Phone Financial Services: Measures for Mitigating Risks from Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing, The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, 2008. http://www.wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2008/09/17/000
333038_20080917011913/Rendered/PDF/443840REVISED01ne01010200801PUBLIC1.pdf2FIN-2009-R001 – “FinCEN Issues Ruling (FIN-2009-R001) on Whether Certain Operations of a Service Provider to Prepaid Stored Value Program Participants is a Money Services Business” - 03/10/2009.3 See 31 CFR 1010.100(ff).4Bank Secrecy Act Regulations: Definition of Monetary Instrument, 76 FR 64049 (Oct. 17, 2011).ihttp://www.ffiec.gov/bsa_aml_infobase/documents/regulations/Annunzio_Wylie.pdfii 74 FR 22129 (May 12, 2009)iiihttp://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ24/pdf/PLAW-111publ24.pdfivhttp://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-07-29/pdf/2011-19116.pdf



Content



20110630.pdf89.61 KB

BSA Coalition Anti-Money Laundering Conference
Federal Reserve Board - Richmond, VA
June 28, 2011



Good afternoon. I think this conference - which brings together financial institutions, law enforcement and regulators - is a perfect forum for us to have a productive discussion on the work we are doing at the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network - known as FinCEN, as well as the value to FinCEN - and our law enforcement and regulatory partners - of the data reported under FinCEN's regulations implementing the Bank Secrecy Act, or BSA.
I know before lunch you heard from others about how Suspicious Activity Reports play an important role in their efforts. I think their remarks have set me up nicely to speak a bit more broadly about how SARs - and the other data reported under the BSA - are important to our common goal of safeguarding the financial system.
FinCEN overview
FinCEN was established just over 21 years ago to combat money laundering, track illicit finance, and serve as a nexus for information gathering and sharing among Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
This responsibility is still at the core of FinCEN's operations. But just as financial criminals adapt their tactics to evade detection, FinCEN's mission must continue to evolve, and our focus now includes new responsibilities to help combat terrorist financing, fraud, and other increasingly sophisticated financial crimes.
As many of you know, FinCEN administers the BSA, the nation's first and most comprehensive Federal anti-money laundering (AML) and counter-terrorism financing statute. In brief, the BSA authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to issue regulations requiring banks and other financial institutions to take a number of precautions against financial crime, including the establishment of AML programs, and "to require certain reports or records where they have a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations and proceedings, or in the conduct of intelligence or counterintelligence activities, including analysis, to protect against international terrorism." The Secretary of the Treasury has delegated administration of the BSA to FinCEN.
The key to everything we do is sharing the extremely valuable information that financial institutions provide to us. As part of our responsibility, FinCEN oversees the maintenance of a database with approximately 180 million records of financial transactions and other reports filed by financial institutions like yours. This data represents the most broadly relied upon and largest source of financial intelligence available to law enforcement.
In addition to collecting, analyzing, securing, and disseminating the BSA data to our law enforcement and regulatory partners, FinCEN itself is also a financial institution regulator. We have the challenging but important task of writing and coordinating the enforcement of AML rules for over 100,000 banks, credit unions, money services businesses (MSBs), insurance companies, securities brokers, casinos, mutual funds, precious metal dealers, and other financial institutions that face the risk of being used by criminals to support enterprises ranging from drug cartels, mortgage fraud rings, terrorist finance networks, immigrant smuggling, and much more.
Given the scope of FinCEN's mission, people are often surprised to learn that our workforce is only comprised of slightly over 300 employees. Our dedicated team includes analysts that study and research the BSA data to support law enforcement - both domestically and internationally; regulatory experts developing guidance for the financial industry; and IT specialists building systems to ensure the BSA information your institutions file is readily accessible to our law enforcement and regulatory partners.
Feedback on the Use and Usefulness of BSA Data
Last year, FinCEN undertook an outreach initiative to smaller depository institutions all over the country to hear about how these institutions implement their anti-money laundering programs, including unique challenges faced by institutions across this asset class and where additional guidance from FinCEN could be helpful. These meetings built upon FinCEN's previous outreach with large depository institutions in 2008, followed in 2009 by meetings with some of the nation's largest money services businesses.
In addition to on-site meetings with 18 depository institutions in 13 states, FinCEN staff also held town hall style meetings in both Chicago, Illinois and Eden Prairie, Minnesota, where we engaged with more than 40 different institutions.
Based on the number of institutions that expressed an interest in meeting at FinCEN's offices, FinCEN invited a number of them to participate in two town hall meetings hosted at FinCEN's offices in suburban Washington, D.C. A total of four institutions from Virginia participated in the FinCEN town hall meetings - two of which are actually attending the conference today.
The one common theme that arose during these meetings was about the use and usefulness of the BSA information reported to FinCEN. Most notably the Currency Transaction Report (CTR) - filed for each deposit, withdrawal, exchange of currency or other payment or transfer by, through, or to an institution that involves a transaction in currency of more than $10,000, and the SAR - the form upon which institutions report suspicious transactions exceeding $5,000.
This question of the use and usefulness of the data has been, and may always be, the most common and prominent question raised by regulated financial
institutions, of all sizes and across all financial industry sectors. With that in mind, I would like to spend a moment talking abouthow FinCEN - and others - are using this data that is entrusted to us by your institutions.
Tip Off: Primarily with respect to a SAR, but also sometimes with a CTR, the BSA information provided can be the first tip that starts an investigation. A financial institution employee's good instincts can, and do, result in the contribution of critical information that serves to set investigatory wheels in motion to track down suspected criminal activity. Most people understand and expect this usage, yet fail to appreciate the following, arguably broader uses of BSA data.
Identifying Information: When an investigation is already underway, the BSA information can add significant value by pointing to the identities of previously unknown subjects, exposing accounts and other hidden financial relationships, or unveiling items of identifying information like common addresses or phone numbers that connect seemingly unrelated individuals and, in some cases, even confirming locations of suspects at certain times.
Law enforcement, again and again, confirms the reliability of the information in BSA reports, which is a direct reflection of the diligence and training within institutions such as yours.
Trends: Law enforcement investigators, as well as FinCEN analysts, can use technology to examine the entire BSA information base more broadly. When expertly queried, the data unmasks trends and patterns that hold the tell-tale signs of criminal or terrorist networks and emerging threats. Hidden in the wealth of information, but easily revealed by skilled analysts with the right tools, are very reliable and credible reports of mortgage fraud, check fraud, identity theft, bribery, counterfeiting, insider abuse, and other suspected crimes.
This information can also be overlaid on a map to make apparent the geographic range of suspicious activity and allow law enforcement agencies to better allocate their limited resources for maximum effectiveness. We can only gain such insights with the aid of a large database in which we see vulnerabilities invisible to individual institutions or perhaps seemingly innocuous in a single report.
Deterrence: The very existence of BSA regulations has a deterrent effect on those who would abuse the financial system. The certainty of a CTR filing and the mere possibility of a SAR filing force criminals to behave in risky ways that expose them to scrutiny and capture.
Criminals fear detection if they use the U.S. financial system and are willing to take great risk to avoid its well-designed capability to detect illicit activity. The definitive CTR threshold forces criminals to structure their transaction which, in turn, exposes them to a SAR filing. CTRs and SARs are complementary forms that together create an intimidating criminal trap. In addition to the increased likelihood of discovery, it's a success of its own that our collective efforts make it more difficult and time consuming for illicit actors to realize the proceeds of crime or raise funds for terrorist attacks.
In summary, information reported to FinCEN under the BSA can - and does - play an important role in different ways that contribute to the success of many law enforcement investigations. With that in mind, I'd like to take a minute to share with you more specifics about how FinCEN engages with its law enforcement and regulatory partners in Virginia.
Who is Using the BSA Data?
As you've heard today, the United States Attorney's Offices are active users of the BSA data to support their investigations. FinCEN has 86 MOUs in place with U.S. Attorney's Offices all around the country to enable them to access the BSA data to support their prosecutions of criminals. There are currently more than 11,500 active users of the BSA data around the country at all levels of the law enforcement and regulatory community.
In addition to those who can access the BSA data remotely, FinCEN also opens its doors to law enforcement agencies who wish to come to our office to access the BSA data. Our Platform Program provides onsite access to FinCEN systems for designated personnel in the Washington, D.C. area who are conducting research for their agency's investigations. Currently, 41 Federal law enforcement agencies participate in this program.
FinCEN's systems also provide us with alerts when more than one agency is researching the same subject within the BSA data. Last year alone, FinCEN networked agencies together more than 1,000 times by contacting investigative personnel in the respective agencies and providing them contact information for other agency personnel. Networking can help law enforcement by facilitating information sharing, avoiding potential negative impacts on other cases, and maximizing resources. Our networking capabilities are also enhanced by the fact that FinCEN has representatives working on-site from 12 different Federal law enforcement and regulatory agencies.
FinCEN also provides direct analytical support to law enforcement efforts across the state of Virginia, and conducts strategic analysis based on studying the BSA information. The focus of much of our work in this area has been on mortgage loan fraud.
Just this morning, FinCEN issued its Mortgage Loan Fraud (MLF) analysis for the first quarter of 2011, which found that the number of MLF suspicious activity reports (SARs) rose to 25,485, up 31 percent from 19,420 in the first quarter of 2010. Our analysis attributes the increase to large mortgage lenders conducting additional reviews after receiving demands to repurchase poorly performing mortgage loans. In the 2011 first quarter, 86 percent of MLF SARs reported activities which occurred more than two years prior to the filing of the SARs.
Our analysis also found that for the first quarter of 2011, Fairfax, Virginia now ranks 7th in the country - per capita - for number of reported mortgage fraud subjects, up from 18th in the last quarter of 2010.
How the BSA data is used in Virginia
Law enforcement and regulatory officials in Virginia are very active users of BSA information. In addition to our Federal users located in Virginia, these State and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies include: The Virginia State Police, the Virginia Attorney General's Office, the Fairfax County Police Department, the Prince William County Police Department, the U.S. Attorney's Office, both the Eastern and Western Districts in Virginia, and the Virginia Bureau of Financial Institutions.
Each state also has a coordinator, so law enforcement agencies without direct access to the BSA data are able to make requests through them to query the information. In Virginia, the coordinator is the Virginia State Police.
Virginia also has several active SAR Review Teams in the state that review SARs filed within their jurisdiction. There are over 100 SAR Review Teams located throughout the country, typically coordinated through the U.S. Attorney's Office. SAR Review Teams are comprised of State, local, and Federal law enforcement and regulatory authorities in the area, meet on a regular basis to review SARs filed within their judicial district, and coordinate law enforcement investigative follow-up as appropriate. In Virginia, there are SAR Review Teams in the Northern Virginia area, as well as in Richmond and Roanoke.
SAR Review Teams typically meet each month, looking at every SAR filed by financial institutions in their jurisdiction. Investigators identify SARs of interest to follow-up on, subpoena records, query the BSA database, and conduct interviews to build cases for prosecution. Some SAR Review Teams, including those in Virginia, are particularly active in developing investigations and prosecutions in structuring cases. And the government does investigate and prosecute structuring, in particular where the investigation may suggest other criminal activity (that might not be apparent to a financial institution).
I know you have already heard about some of the successes these teams have had through listening to Steve Gurdak and Laura Marshall this morning. Because of FinCEN's location in Northern Virginia, we are fortunate to have the opportunity to interact regularly with Steve's SAR Review Team in Northern Virginia, which is known nationally for its successes and innovative approaches to targeting violations of the BSA. This SAR review team is comprised of members from the Federal, State, and local law enforcement community in the Northern Virginia area.
FinCEN's interaction with this SAR Review Team includes providing FinCEN personnel to help in the SAR review process as well as offering technical assistance in areas such as gaining access to the records, the proper use of the SARs in criminal investigations, and even reaching out to our international counterparts for background information on reporting requirements in other countries. In turn, the SAR Review Team has participated in meetings and presentations at FinCEN where Steve and his colleagues have discussed their investigative techniques and approaches as well as some of the more notable prosecutions.
Virginia BSA Filings: A Snapshot
Now that we've spent some time discussing the use of the data, I wanted to quickly touch on what FinCEN is seeing statistically with the BSA data Virginia institutions are filing.
SAR filings in Virginia totaled 18,785 in 2010, down 8% from the previous year's total of 20,414 filings (as compared to a 3% decline in SAR-DIs filed nationally). Looking more closely at the Virginia filings, decreases were seen in filings reporting suspected credit card fraud (down 35% from the previous year), false statement (down 63%), wire transfer fraud (down 38%), and identity theft (down 32%).
Comparing Virginia to other states, for 2010, Virginia's total number of SAR-DI filings ranked it 10th nationally. When ranking states by number of subjects - per capita - in calendar year 2010, Virginia is ranked 21st.
Geographically - and understandably - the highest concentration of SARs filed in Virginia came from the state's most populated areas, including Northern Virginia, the Richmond area, and the Norfolk area.
In terms of characterizations of suspicious activity, BSA/Structuring/Money Laundering was the most frequently cited violation, occurring in 1/3 of the SARs filed (as compared to about 50% nationally). Credit card fraud was ranked 2nd in Virginia, at 14%, (while nationally, this suspicious activity type ranks 5th and is cited on about 5% of SAR-DIs). The third most commonly listed suspicious activity type in Virginia filings is "other" followed next by "wire transfer fraud," which was listed last year in 10% of SAR-DIs filed in Virginia. Nationally, wire transfer fraud is reflected on slightly more than 1% of all SARs filed.
For those of you interested in learning more about SAR statistics either in your state or across the country, FinCEN publishes statistics twice a year on our website where you can not only review various numerical breakdowns, but can also see the information plotted using mapping techniques.
Information Sharing
314(a)
Another area I wanted to touch on, which was also discussed during our outreach meetings last year, is the use of the 314(a) and 314(b) programs.
As most of you are probably aware, FinCEN's regulations under Section 314(a) of the USA PATRIOT Act enable Federal, State, local, and foreign (European Union) law enforcement agencies, through FinCEN, to reach out to more than 45,000 points of contact at more than 22,000 financial institutions to locate accounts and transactions of persons that may be involved in terrorism or significant money laundering. I'm sure many in this room today actually serve as the contact for their institution.
FinCEN receives requests from law enforcement agencies and upon review sends requests to designated contacts within financial institutions across the country generally once every two weeks via a secure Internet Web site. The requests contain subject and business names, addresses, and as much identifying data as possible to assist the financial institutions in searching their records.
The financial institutions must query their records for data matches, including accounts maintained by the named subject during the preceding 12 months and transactions conducted within the last six months, unless a different time period is specified in the request. Financial institutions typically have two weeks from the transmission date of the request to respond to 314(a) requests. If the search does not uncover any matching of accounts or transactions, the financial institution is instructed not to reply to the 314(a) request.
To date, financial institutions have responded with over 93,000 positive subject matches - and over 4,000 of these responses have come from financial institutions in Virginia. Based on the total feedback we have received using the current revised feedback reporting form, 88% of 314(a) requests have contributed to arrests or indictments, demonstrating the high value of information these institutions are providing to law enforcement.
FinCEN's review of our data also shows that in the past 5 years, approximately 64 percent of positive 314(a) matches have come from institutions with assets under $5 billion. In addition, of the total number of institutions that have responded to 314(a) requests over this 5-year period, FinCEN estimates that 92 percent of these institutions have assets under $5 billion.
The general proposition remains true that in absolute terms a very small depository institution is statistically less likely to be touched by organized criminal activity than the largest depository institutions with millions of customers and tens or hundreds of billions in assets. But the 314(a) statistics alone have shown that in comparative terms a disproportionately high number of actual cases of terrorist financing and significant money laundering have involved accounts and transactions at smaller depository institutions. The 314(a) statistics underscore the importance that all financial institutions, big and small, have an understanding of the risks affecting them and should implement appropriate policies and procedures to mitigate those risks.
314(b)
Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act allows regulated financial institutions to share information with each other for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting possible money laundering or terrorist activity.
In speaking with many of the largest banks in 2008, FinCEN found use of the 314(b) process to be quite extensive, with several banks noting that they often use the 314(b) process throughout the course of a SAR investigation, before filing a SAR or making a decision to close an account. In our discussions with institutions with assets under $5 billion, however, FinCEN found there was rather limited use of the 314(b) program.
For an institution to share, they simply need to visit FinCEN's Web site and fill out a short form providing notice of their intent to share information, and designating a point of contact. The form is very simple to complete and FinCEN will provide you with a 314(b) certification for your records.
In FinCEN's town hall meetings last year, institutions shared their experiences with 314(b) including how simple the procedure is to register with FinCEN. One institution shared how difficult it was to discuss a case with a counterpart (for example, seeking more information about a potentially suspicious wire transfer from the institution originating the transfer) in the absence of the institutions being registered under 314(b). This is exactly the kind of situation where the institutions should be relying on the safe harbor available under 314(b). Absent the safe harbor provided by 314(b), an institution could find itself in violation of laws and customer confidentiality obligations.
While participation in 314(b) is ultimately voluntary, FinCEN is continuing to pursue avenues in which the importance of information sharing in order to protect the financial system can be conveyed. For those of you not among the 78 institutions in Virginia currently signed up to share via the 314(b) program, please don't hesitate to visit FinCEN's Web site atwww.fincen.gov or contact the FinCEN 314 Program Office with any questions you may have. The number is (866) 326-8314.
E-Filing
One last area I would like to mention is FinCEN's ongoing effort to encourage financial institutions that must file BSA reports to utilize the BSA E?Filing system in lieu of submitting paper reports. The E-Filing system benefits financial institutions as the system is free to users, enables information to be made available in a more timely manner to law enforcement, is less expensive than paper based processing, improves data quality and data security, and provides financial institutions with enhanced audit and recordkeeping capabilities.
During our outreach meetings last year, FinCEN received very strong endorsements of the E-Filing system, in particular at the town hall meetings, where industry representatives that had not yet begun E-Filing were eager to hear the positive experiences of those that had, even among the smallest institutions filing individual reports on only an occasional basis. The E-Filing efforts are the most visible public side of a multi-year information technology modernization effort that FinCEN is currently undergoing to better support our own mission and leverage benefits to the hundreds of Federal, State, and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies we serve. If your institution has not yet moved to E-Filing, I urge you to consider it.
Conclusion
I hope in my remarks today I have been able to share with you a little about the work FinCEN does - particularly in the area of how we use the BSA data and the usefulness to law enforcement of this information. Providing feedback in this area is something we take very seriously. However, we must also be diligent to find the appropriate balance between sharing information and maintaining appropriate confidentiality.
Particularly with respect to SARs, FinCEN and law enforcement take very seriously the obligation of public trust in which sensitive personal and financial information about customers is reported under an expectation and obligation of confidentiality. The obligation to protect the confidentiality of reported information prevents us from disclosing that a SAR was filed or from providing too many investigative details even in the case of an ultimate criminal conviction. And even in more general trend reports, sometimes we seek to avoid providing a level of detail that would serve as a roadmap for criminals to see how others have successfully laundered money or the investigative techniques that law enforcement has used to apprehend them.
With that being said, FinCEN is committed to continuing to share as much as we can in this area. Thank you again for your time today and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
 



Content



20060621.pdf40.92 KB

Before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Financial Services, Subcommittee
June 21, 2006



Chairman Bachus, Ranking Member Sanders, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss initiatives that the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is implementing under the Bank Secrecy Act relating to the money services business sector. Your leadership and commitment to understanding and publicly discussing the issues confronting this industry is critical not only to the safety and soundness of our financial system, but also to our nation`s security.
I am pleased to be here today with Eileen Mayer, Director of the Small Business/ Self Employed Division of the Internal Revenue Service; Ann Jaedicke, Deputy Comptroller for Compliance Policy at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; and Superintendent Diana Taylor from the New York State Banking Department. Each of these agencies plays a vital role in implementing Bank Secrecy Act requirements. I am happy to say we have forged a strong working relationship in our united effort to regulate the money services business industry.
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has regulated the money services business industry under the Bank Secrecy Act since the 1990s. Issues surrounding the money services business regulatory regime, including the need to identify unlicensed and unregistered money services businesses, conduct robust federal Bank Secrecy Act compliance examinations, and ensure access to banking services, continue to be at the forefront of our agenda.
As you may already know, the term ``money services businesses`` under our regulations refers to five distinct types of financial services providers: (1) currency exchangers; (2) check cashers; (3) issuers, sellers, or redeemers of traveler`s checks, money orders, or stored value; (4) the United States Postal Service; and (5) money transmitters.
Bank Secrecy Act regulations require money services businesses to: establish written anti-money laundering programs; file Currency Transaction Reports and Suspicious Activity Reports (certain money services businesses only); maintain certain records with regard to customers who purchase monetary instruments with cash; record certain information about funds transfers; and include certain information in the transmittals of orders for such funds transfers. In addition, certain money services businesses are required to register with FinCEN and maintain a list of agents.
Money services businesses provide various financial products that have traditionally been provided at banking institutions. For example, a money services business customer can take his or her paycheck to a check casher and convert it into cash. Customers can also purchase money orders or transfer the funds, both within the United States and abroad, using the services of a money transmitter. All such services are available without requiring the customer to establish an account relationship.
Access to Banking Services
As you are aware, there has been mounting concern among FinCEN, financial regulators, and the money services business industry regarding the ability of money services businesses to obtain and maintain banking services. Many banks have stated their uncertainty as to the appropriate steps that they should take under the Bank Secrecy Act to manage potential anti-money laundering and terrorist financing risks. At the same time, the money services business industry has expressed concern that misperceptions of risk may be unfairly labeling them as ``unbankable.``
Individual decisions to terminate account relationships, when compounded across the U.S. banking system, have the potential to result in a serious restriction in available banking services to an entire market segment. The money services business industry provides valuable financial services, especially to individuals who may not have ready access to the formal banking sector and require bank accounts. Consequently, it is important that money services businesses that comply with the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and applicable state laws remain within the formal financial sector, subject to appropriate anti- money laundering controls. Equally important is ensuring that the money services business industry maintain the same level of transparency, including the implementation of a full range of anti-money laundering controls as required by law, as do other financial institutions. If money services business account relationships are terminated on a widespread basis, we believe many of these businesses could go ``underground.`` This potential loss of transparency would, in our view, significantly damage our collective efforts to protect the U.S. financial system from money laundering and other financial crime - including terrorist financing. Clearly, resolving this issue is critical to our achieving the goals of the Bank Secrecy Act.
In March 2005, the Non-Bank Financial Institutions and the Examination subcommittees of the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group jointly hosted a fact-finding meeting to solicit information from banks as well as money services businesses on issues surrounding the provision of banking services to the money services business industry. Subsequently, in April 2005, FinCEN and the federal banking agencies issued interagency guidance to the banking industry on regulatory expectations when providing banking services to domestic money services businesses. FinCEN issued a companion advisory providing guidance to money services businesses on what they should expect when obtaining and maintaining banking services.
Guidance, Education & Regulation
Currently, based upon what we learned at the March 2005 meeting, and in subsequent discussions with other federal and state regulators, law enforcement, and the industry, we have developed and are implementing a three-point plan for addressing these issues:
1. Guidance -- That outlines with specificity Bank Secrecy Act compliance expectations when banks maintain accounts for money services businesses.
In March 2005, FinCEN and the federal banking agencies took the first step toward addressing the concerns expressed by banks and money services businesses by issuing a Joint Statement on Providing Banking Services to Money Services Businesses. The purpose of the Joint Statement was to assert clearly that the Bank Secrecy Act does not require, and neither the Federal Banking Agencies nor we expect, banking institutions to serve as de facto regulators of the money services business industry. The Joint Statement also made it clear that banks that open or maintain accounts for money services businesses are expected to apply the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act to money services business customers on a risk-assessed basis, as they would for any other customer, taking into account the products and services offered and the individual circumstances.
Shortly after issuing this Joint Statement, we issued the more specific guidance that I mentioned earlier in my testimony on the compliance expectations for both banks and money services businesses. Since that time, we have issued additional guidance to banks and money services businesses, addressing issues ranging from development and implementation of anti-money laundering programs to registration and de-registration of money services businesses and record keeping obligations. We strongly believe that this guidance has assisted in further clarifying Bank Secrecy Act requirements and supervisory expectations as applied to accounts opened or maintained for money services businesses.
However, we neither believe that this guidance can solve all issues of concern relating to money services businesses nor that it will repair all relationships between money services businesses and banks. Nonetheless, we are committed to continue working with the federal banking agencies and other federal and state partners, law enforcement, banks, and money services businesses to do everything we can to clarify expectations.
Education - That provides banks and bank examiners enhanced education on the operation of the variety of products and services offered by money services businesses and the range of risks that each may pose.
As the regulatory regime for money services businesses has developed, FinCEN has taken a number of steps to reach out to this historically unregulated industry in order to educate it about the Bank Secrecy Act and applicable regulatory requirements. We have developed a website devoted solely to money services businesses ( https://www.fincen.gov/resources/financial-institutions/money-services-businesses ) and provided Bank Secrecy Act compliance materials to the industry in a nationwide outreach program and through ongoing regulatory guidance. We are also in the process of updating and publishing our educational materials in seven foreign languages.
3. Regulation - That strengthens the existing federal regulatory and examination regime for money service businesses, including coordinating with state regulators to better ensure consistency and leverage examination resources.
Within the last year, we have proposed to revise, simplify, and shorten the money services businesses Suspicious Activity Report form. Our expectation is that this will enhance the ease of completing and filing the form while still obtaining critical information needed by law enforcement. We will also reexamine our registration requirement for money services businesses and ensure that it is achieving the purpose intended in the law; that is, to identify the universe of lawfully operating money services businesses so that law enforcement can focus on those businesses that are operating outside the law. With respect to the issues surrounding the provision of banking services to money services businesses, we are considering additional actions, guidance, and outreach necessary to address this issue. For example, in March 2006 we published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to seek additional information from the banking and money services business industries on this issue. We will be receiving comments through July 10th and giving those comments our serious consideration. We are also continuing to work closely with our colleagues at the Internal Revenue Service, to enhance the examination regime through the development of revised Bank Secrecy Act examination procedures, information sharing, and examination targeting. Additionally, as noted previously, we will continue to work closely with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors and state regulators on these issues. Executing individual agreements with state banking agencies will ensure better coordination and synergy with state-based examiners and improve consistency in examination processes.
We also intend to continue working on developing indicators for law enforcement and financial institutions to help identify unlicensed and unregistered money services businesses. By providing law enforcement, banks, and other financial institutions with indicia of illicit activity, they will be better able to help us identify money services businesses that choose to operate outside the regulatory regime. It remains vital that we strike the appropriate balance between education and outreach, and criminal enforcement. We will continue to reach out to those businesses that remain uninformed about the regulatory requirements, while at the same time, support aggressive criminal enforcement of those businesses that do not intend to operate within the law and are engaged in furthering potential underlying criminal activity.
Registration with FinCEN
As noted, identification of money services businesses subject to Bank Secrecy Act requirements is an essential first step in effective regulation. Our effort to identify money services businesses begins with the Bank Secrecy Act requirement to register with FinCEN and maintain lists of agents. However, the industry is largely composed of small, unsophisticated businesses whose primary business is often something other than the money services that they provide - frequently, to the poor and unbanked. Additionally, due to language barriers within certain ethnic communities, there may be confusion regarding the applicable regulations.
Undoubtedly, our efforts to identify money services businesses have not been entirely effective. First, there are a substantial number of money services businesses that are not required to register, and many money services businesses required to register have not done so. Second, the current registration requirement is confusing and unwieldy, requiring a principal money services business to register - but not the principal`s agents.
For example, the regulation requires that Western Union register with FinCEN as a money services business and keep accurate records of its 70,000-plus agents, but it does not require those agents to register (unless they provide money services business services as a principal in addition to those provided solely as an agent for Western Union). Notwithstanding that they do not have to register, these same agents are still defined to be money services businesses and thus have an independent obligation to comply with all other applicable Bank Secrecy Act requirements. Furthermore, these agents often provide other services unrelated to their agency relationship, such as check cashing, which - often unbeknownst to the independent agent - gives rise to an independent duty to register with FinCEN. Moreover, the regulation does not require the principal money service business to identify its agents to FinCEN or any appropriate law enforcement organization absent a specific request. This has created a significant gap in our efforts to identify the number of money services businesses currently operating.
We recognize that the complexity of our current approach to MSB registration may be contributing to a lack of registration and we are working on solutions to provide a more efficient and reliable method for identifying money services businesses.
Additionally, we plan to better leverage our state information sharing agreements. Most states require certain money services businesses (mostly money transmitters or check cashers) to be licensed; additionally, although most state requirements are geared toward consumer protection interests, more and more states are incorporating anti-money laundering requirements into their licensing regimes. We have executed information sharing agreements with 41 state regulatory agencies, including those responsible for licensing and examining money services businesses. As a result of these agreements, we will be better able to compare and use our respective examination findings and other information to identify money services businesses and ensure their compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. We are also developing internal analytical products as well as working closely with the Internal Revenue Service and with law enforcement, in particular the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Immigration and Customs Enforcement, in our effort to identify possible unregistered money services businesses. Once we identify unregistered entities, we have developed outreach procedures for educating these businesses as to their obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act, and refer for prosecutorial investigation those entities that fail to register after appropriate outreach.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we are grateful for your leadership and that of other members of the Subcommittee on this issue and stand ready to assist in your continuing efforts to ensure the safety and soundness of our financial system. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I look forward to any questions you have regarding my testimony.



Content


fincenruling2005-6.pdf41.38 KB

FinCEN Ruling 2005-6
Suspicious Activity Reporting (Structuring)

Issued Date
July 15, 2005


Dear [ ]:
Thank you for your letter requesting our views concerning the extent to which financial institutions must establish programs to review currency transactions to detect and report “structuring” when the conduct does not require the filing of a currency transaction report. You also request guidance regarding the extent and parameters under which multiple day monitoring for potentially suspicious activity should be positively initiated.
As you note in your letter, 31 C.F.R. § 103.18 requires, in part, banks and credit unions to file a Suspicious Activity Report if a transaction involves or aggregates at least $5,000 in funds or other assets, and the bank knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that the transaction is designed to evade any requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act, i.e., structuring. To comply with the suspicious activity reporting regulation, a bank or credit union must have in place systems to identify the kinds of transactions and accounts that may exhibit indicia of suspicious activity. Otherwise, a bank or credit union cannot assure that it is reporting suspicious transactions as required by the Bank Secrecy Act.
Structuring is the breaking up of transactions for the purpose of evading the Bank Secrecy Act reporting and recordkeeping requirements and, if appropriate thresholds are met, should be reported as a suspicious transaction under 31 C.F.R. § 103.18. Structuring can take two basic forms. First, a customer might deposit currency on multiple days in amounts under $10,000 (e.g., $9,900.00) for the intended purpose of circumventing a financial institution’s obligation to report any cash deposit over $10,000 on a currency transaction report as described in 31 C.F.R. § 103.22. Although such deposits do not require aggregation for currency transaction reporting, since they occur on different business days, they nonetheless meet the definition of structuring under the Bank Secrecy Act, implementing regulations, and relevant case law. In another variation on basic structuring, a customer or customers may engage in multiple transactions during one day or over a period of several days or more, in one or more branches of a bank or credit union, in a manner intended to circumvent either the currency transaction reporting requirement, or some other Bank Secrecy Act requirement, such as the recordkeeping requirements for funds transfers of $3,000 or more appearing in 31 C.F.R. § 103.33(e). Structuring may be indicative of underlying illegal activity; further, structuring itself is unlawful under the Bank Secrecy Act.1
A financial institution’s anti-money laundering program should be designed to detect and report both categories of structuring to guard against use of the institution for money laundering and ensure the institution is compliant with the suspicious activity reporting requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act.2 The extent and specific parameters under which a financial institution must monitor accounts and transactions for suspicious activity should be commensurate with the level of money laundering and terrorist financing risk of the specific institution, considering the type of products and services it offers, the locations it serves, and the nature of its customers. In other words, suspicious activity monitoring and reporting systems cannot be “one size fits all.”
Over the past year, FinCEN has worked closer than ever before with the federal banking agencies to better ensure the consistent application of Bank Secrecy Act through the examination process. FinCEN collaborated with the federal banking agencies in the development of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Counsel Bank Secrecy Act examination manual, which emphasizes a bank’s responsibility to establish and implement risk-based policies, procedures and processes to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act and safeguard its operations from money laundering and terrorist financing. Appendix G of the manual contains a discussion of structuring that you may find helpful. We expect the release of the examination manual to reinforce the importance of robust systems to identify and, where appropriate, report suspicious activity. In addition, we note that FinCEN and the federal banking agencies are participating in various outreach events in conjunction with the release of the examination manual, and we invite your participation in these events.
Should you have any additional questions on this subject, please contact FinCEN’s Office of Compliance, at 202-354-6400.
 
Sincerely,
			/signed/
			William D. Langford, Jr.
			Associate Director
			Regulatory Policy & Programs Division
			Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
 
 
 
1 See 31 U.S.C. § 5324 and 31 C.F.R. § 103.63
2 See, for example, Matter of Western Union, No. 2003-02 (March 6, 2003), and Matter of Riggs Bank, N.A., No. 2004-01 (May 13, 2004).

Financial Institution

Casinos
Depository Institutions
Money Services Businesses
Mortgage Co/Broker
Securities and Futures




Content



20040928a.pdf52.88 KB

BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON BANKING, HOUSING, AND URBAN AFFAIRS
September 28, 2004



Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and distinguished Members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you to discuss the issues and challenges before us as we attempt to establish an effective and comprehensive antimoney laundering regulatory regime for two diverse and important sectors in the financial industry – money services businesses and casinos. Again, we applaud your leadership Mr. Chairman and the leadership of Senator Sarbanes and the other members of this Committee on these issues. These issues are critically important to the health of our nation’s financial system and, indeed, our national security.
It is a pleasure for me to be here today with Superintendent Diana Taylor of the New York Banking Department and Commissioner Kevin Brown of the Internal Revenue Service’s Small Business/Self-Employed Division. Superintendent Taylor and I have begun what I believe to be a very good dialogue between our two agencies. We have high hopes that this dialogue will lead to a closer and deeper relationship with the New York Banking Department that will prove to be mutually beneficial.
As you know, the Secretary of the Treasury has delegated Bank Secrecy Act examination authority to the Internal Review Service for a variety of non-bank financial institutions including money services businesses and casinos. Commissioner Brown’s division is responsible for this program. In the short time I have worked with him, I can state unequivocally that he and the people he has dedicated to this effort are taking their responsibilities under the Bank Secrecy Act quite seriously. We are all fortunate to have Commissioner Brown and his team in place.
When I appeared before you last June, I outlined a plan for establishing more aggressive and coordinated administration of the regulatory implementation of the Bank Secrecy Act. Since that time, we have made progress.
We have created, within the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network’s Regulatory Division, a new Office of Compliance devoted solely to overseeing the implementation of the Bank Secrecy Act regulatory regime by those agencies with delegated examination authority.
We have created a new Office of Regulatory Support in our Analytics Division, thereby devoting, for the first time in the history of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, a significant part of our analytic muscle to our regulatory programs. These analysts will be used to identify regulatory weak points and common compliance deficiencies. The analysts will assist our Office of Compliance and the other delegated examiners to be smarter about their programs for Bank Secrecy Act compliance.
We are very close to finalizing a Memorandum of Understanding with the five federal bank regulators to provide information to us, in both specific and aggregate fashion, to prevent another situation such as the Riggs matter earlier this year and to give us a better understanding of the overall health of the Bank Secrecy Act regulatory regime. In those agreements, we have committed our direct involvement and support to those regulators in helping them discharge their regulatory plans.
Finally, we are working to obtain similar agreements with the Internal Revenue Service, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodities Futures Trading Commission, which will enhance our collective ability to oversee Bank Secrecy Act compliance in the non-bank financial sectors.
 
Mr. Chairman, the importance of the personal and direct support that you and your colleagues on the Committee have provided to these efforts cannot be understated. That support will enable us to implement this plan in a much faster and more efficient manner. We believe that is critical and important, and we wish to thank you for that support.
I would do this Committee and my Agency a disservice if I did not tell you that we believe that the challenges associated with establishing and implementing an effective and comprehensive regulatory regime for non-bank financial institutions have been and continue to be extraordinary. In the money services business industry alone, we continue to face innumerable challenges. Beyond that, the USA PATRIOT Act directed FinCEN to extend the regulatory landscape to an even broader range of financial institutions, including such varied entities as unregistered investment companies, operators of credit cards systems, insurance companies and dealers in precious metals, stones and jewels. While we are firmly committed to expanding the Bank Secrecy Act regulatory regime to those financial service providers posing risks for abuse by money launders and terrorists, it is essential that everyone understand the challenges we are facing when it comes to ensuring compliance with those regimes.
That said, it is our view that the non-bank financial services industry generally, and money services businesses and casinos in particular, understand the important link between the Bank Secrecy Act and our national security, and seek to comply with our regulations. There will always be outliers who seek to avoid regulation for the purpose of carrying out illegal acts. There will also always be those industries, such as the money services business industry, where we find a significant number of persons who do not understand their compliance obligations. Our task is to maximize compliance from all by utilizing the skills, resources and expertise of our federal and state based regulatory partners.
I. Money Services Businesses
A. Overview of the Money Services Business Industry
The term “money services business” refers to five distinct types of financial services providers: currency dealers or exchangers; check cashers; issuers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value; sellers or redeemers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value; and money transmitters. The five types of financial services are complementary and are often provided together at a common location. Money services businesses have grown to provide a set of financial products that one would traditionally look to banks to provide. For example, a money services business customer who receives a paycheck can take the check to a check casher to have it converted to cash. The customer can then purchase money orders to pay bills. Finally, the customer may choose to send funds to relatives abroad, using the services of a money transmitter. All of these services are available without the customer needing to establish an account relationship with a bank or credit union. These businesses perform valuable services to a wide array of individuals.
In 1997, FinCEN commissioned Coopers & Lybrand to conduct a study of the industry prior to its rulemaking process. Based on this study, we had estimated the number of money services businesses nationwide to be in excess of 200,000.1 Of these, approximately 40,000 were outlets of the U.S. Postal Service, which sells money orders. The study estimated that eight business enterprises accounted for the bulk of money services business financial products (that is, money transmissions, money orders, traveler’s checks, and check cashing and currency exchange availability) sold within the United States, and accounted, through systems of agents, for the bulk of locations at which these financial products were sold. Members of this first group include large firms, with significant capitalization, that are publicly traded on major securities exchanges. We are commissioning another survey to and update the information in the Coopers & Lybrand Study to get a better sense of the current size, composition, and nature of the industry, as well as of the potential for growth in the industry’s component segments.
A larger group of (on average) far smaller enterprises competes with the largest firms in a highly bifurcated market for money services. In some cases, these small enterprises are based in one location with two to four employees. Moreover, the members of this second group may provide both financial services and unrelated products or services to the same sets of customers.2 Far less is known about this second tier of firms than about the major providers of money services products.3
B. The Growth of the Legal and Regulatory Framework
Money services businesses have been subject to currency transaction reporting rules since the inception of the Bank Secrecy Act, and additional regulatory obligations have been added subsequently. In 1988, Congress enacted Section 5324 of the Bank Secrecy Act, requiring sellers of monetary instruments for $3,000 or more in currency to verify the identity of the purchasers. The Money Laundering Suppression Act of 1994 mandated a system of registration for money services businesses. This was considered to be a necessary first step towards identifying a universe of financial service providers that was largely unregulated at the federal level, extremely diverse both culturally and in size, and generally unknown to federal regulators beyond the handful of large corporate entities such as Western Union and American Express. FinCEN proposed implementing registration regulations in 1997 along with a proposal to require the filing of suspicious activity reports. FinCEN finalized the rules in 1999, with a phased-in implementation period so that all initial registrations for existing money services businesses were required to be filed by December 31, 2001. In addition, money services businesses were required to begin filing suspicious activity reports in January 2002. In April 2002, in response to the mandate of Section 352 of the USA PATRIOT Act that financial institutions institute anti-money laundering programs, FinCEN issued a final rule requiring money services businesses to establish anti-money laundering programs reasonably designed to prevent such businesses from being used to facilitate money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
C. Addressing the Challenges
The challenges we face in regulating the whole of the money services business industry are significant. We believe that that a multi-faceted approach – a combination of aggressive outreach and education to domestic industry, targeted examinations, fostering and development of similar international standards and approaches, and appropriate civil and criminal enforcement – with close coordination among FinCEN, the Internal Revenue Service, state regulatory authorities, and law enforcement, is the only way that we can maximize industry compliance.
1. Identifying the Universe of Money Services Businesses
Identifying the universe of businesses subject to our money services businesses anti-money laundering regulatory regime is a basic yet challenging initial step. Many of these businesses are small, one- or two-person operations. Additionally, the proprietors may not speak English as a first or even a second language. The challenge of merely identifying these businesses cannot be understated.
Our regulations require most money services businesses to register with the Department of the Treasury every two years. Certain money services businesses are exempt from that registration requirement, including:
U.S. Postal Service outlets;
Businesses that are considered money services businesses solely as issuers, sellers or redeemers of stored value; and
Branch offices and agents of a money services business.4
 
As of September 27, 2004, there are 21,058 money services businesses registered with FinCEN. Although, this number does not take into account the margin of error for filing mistakes, duplications, etc. While not all money services businesses are required to register, we believe there are a significant number of money services businesses required to register that have failed to do so.
Finding ways to enhance compliance with the registration requirement has been a focus of FinCEN since the inception of the registration concept. Initially, we hired a public relations contractor to engage in a multi-year outreach campaign (2000- 2003) designed to educate money services businesses about the new registration and reporting requirements. The campaign employed a variety of techniques. The constituency relations portion of the campaign informed key third-party organizations and corporate entities, and their members and employees, respectively, about the new regulations. Media outreach consisted of issuing press releases, placement of stories and advertisements in targeted media, and arranging interviews with select reporters. Also, four ethnic subcontractors were engaged to conduct ethnic media outreach to the African- American, Arab-American, Asian American, and Latino/Hispanic American communities. In addition, we created a website (https://www.fincen.gov/resources/financial-institutions/money-services-businesses) dedicated to money services business regulations and guidance.
As part of FinCEN’s outreach campaign, we developed free, easy-to-understand educational materials to help inform money services businesses about their obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act. These materials can be ordered or downloaded directly from the https://www.fincen.gov/resources/financial-institutions/money-services-businesses. These materials include a “Quick Reference Guide to Bank Secrecy Act Requirements for Money Services Businesses;” a more detailed guide to money laundering prevention; Posters and “Take One” cards, available in multiple languages and bi-lingual versions, to inform money services business customers about Bank Secrecy Act requirements and help customers understand why the business must ask for personal information; and videos and CD-ROMs, in English and Spanish, with case studies designed to educate money services business employees about the Bank Secrecy Act requirements.
This year we posted the list of registered money services businesses on our website. By identifying registered money services businesses, we are assisting banks and other financial services providers in their own due diligence and publicizing further those businesses that comply with the registration requirement. We updated the list in July of this year, and intend to do such updates at regular intervals going forward.
Most recently we solicited bids from contractors to update the money services businesses industry study originally conducted in 1997. This information, when coupled with the evolving information being obtained by the Internal Revenue Service as it conducts its examination activities, will further guide us in our outreach efforts and help us to target our examination and enforcement resources.
2. Unearthing the Underground Businesses
Perhaps the greatest challenge to regulating effectively the whole of the money services business industry lies in identifying and compelling the compliance of underground money transmitters or other informal value transfer systems. Steeped in history and clouded by secrecy, informal value transfer systems have existed for centuries and they continue to thrive in countries throughout the world, including here United States. Legitimate informal value transfer systems are utilized by a variety of individuals, businesses, and even governments to remit funds domestically and abroad in circumstances where a formal banking system does not exist. However, because such systems provide security, anonymity, and versatility to the user, the systems can be very attractive for misuse by terrorists and criminals. The vulnerability of informal value transfer systems in moving money on behalf of criminal organizations, and their potential misuse by terrorist organizations, poses a substantial investigative challenge to the U.S. law enforcement community, and certainly to us as regulators. These challenges include: (1) non-standardized or non-existent recordkeeping and customer due diligence practices; (2) frequent commingling of informal systems with other business activities, including commodity trading or smuggling; (3) language and cultural barriers; and, (4) inconsistent laws and regulations at the international and domestic levels.
The challenge is further complicated by the recognition that informal value transfer systems often provide invaluable financial services to categories of individuals historically underserved or left out of the formal banking system. Our goal must be clear – to enhance the transparency of such systems through compliance with our regulatory requirements, without eliminating the ability of the unbanked to move legitimate funds to family members in other countries.
From a regulatory perspective, there are few things more challenging than identifying businesses that are deliberately seeking to avoid detection for unlawful purposes. However, in some instances, informal value transfer systems may be ignorant of the regulatory requirements, or they may be avoiding regulation because of a misperception of why we insist on transparency. While persuasion and outreach will never be effective in reaching the former, we are targeting our efforts toward the latter, both domestically and internationally.
In addition to the outreach efforts described above to educate these businesses about the requirements, FinCEN is working with the Department, the Internal Revenue Service and, increasingly, state regulators and law enforcement to better identify money services businesses operating underground, whether intentionally or ignorantly. For example, we are working with the Internal Revenue Service and law enforcement to develop “red flags” for legitimate financial institutions to help us identify money services businesses that choose to operate outside the regulatory regime. This builds on the prior work of FinCEN to educate the financial community about informal value transfer systems in Advisory 33, issued in March of 2003. While it is theoretically possible for informal value transfer systems to operate wholly outside of the banking system, it is not the most likely scenario. Instead, most such systems will utilize an account to clear and settle transactions internationally. By providing our banks and other financial institutions with red flags and other indicia of such clearing accounts, they will be better able to assist us in identifying systems operating outside of our regulations. In our SAR Activity Review (Vol. 6) in November 2003, we highlighted informal value transfer systems and gave examples of the types of activities reported on suspicious activity reports by financial institutions that referenced such operations.
We are continuing our work with the Department of the Treasury on a variety of international initiatives not only to educate other jurisdictions about the need for a comprehensive regulatory regime, but also to learn from the experience of other jurisdictions as they attempt to address the problem of underground value transfer.
We also look forward to working even more closely with law enforcement as they target unlicensed and unregistered money transmitters. It is vital that we strike the appropriate balance between aggressive criminal enforcement and less invasive forms of education and outreach to those operating underground systems. As when we try to bring a school of fish to the surface, the splash spearing the one at the top may cause the others to scatter to the depths of the pond and actually make our job more difficult.
Finally, we will continue to analyze Bank Secrecy Act data, particularly to review suspicious activity reports filed by depository institutions to identify unregistered and/or unlicensed money transmitter businesses, and to perform independent research to unearth underground financial services providers.
3. Achieving better Compliance within the Money Services Sector
Since January 2002, money services businesses have filed more than 450,000 suspicious activity reports. These reports are providing useful information to law enforcement, but we are also seeing common deficiencies that need to be addressed through examination and guidance. This is to be expected from an industry with less experience in filing suspicious activity reports, especially given the wide diversity of businesses with varying levels of sophistication. That said, we are taking steps now to enhance the quality of data received. We have issued guidance to financial institutions on filing complete and accurate suspicious activity reports. Added emphasis is being placed on the quality of suspicious activity report data in all of our training seminars and presentations to the money services business industry. Finally, we will be monitoring reports filed to identify and ultimately minimize the occurrence of blank data fields.
We are seeing positive results. For example, we recently used suspicious activity reports filed by money services businesses to develop a case involving the remittance of U.S. Dollars by U.S. citizens in circumstances indicating the potential for the funds to be diverted for terrorist funding purposes. This case has been referred to law enforcement.
II. Casinos
A. Overview of the Industry
Casinos in the United States are subject to a decentralized regulatory structure and are primarily regulated by the states and by tribal regulatory authorities. All casinos, including tribal casinos, with gross annual gaming revenue in excess of $1,000,000 also are subject to the Bank Secrecy Act. There are approximately 800 casinos and card clubs operating in at least 30 jurisdictions in the U.S. (including Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Tinian) that are subject to the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act. In particular, there has been a rapid growth in riverboat and tribal casino gaming as well as card room gaming over the last ten years. More than $800 billion was wagered at casinos and card clubs in the United States in 2003, accounting for approximately 85 percent of the total amount of money wagered for all legal gaming activities throughout the United States.
B. The Growth of the Legal and Regulatory Framework
State licensed gambling casinos were generally made subject to the recordkeeping and currency reporting requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act by regulation in 1985. Casinos were also, by regulations adopted in their current form in 1993 and amended in 1995 (there was a version in 1993), the first non-bank financial institutions required to develop anti-money laundering programs, prior to enactment of the USA PATRIOT Act. Gambling casinos authorized to do business under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act similarly were made subject to the Bank Secrecy Act by regulation in 1996. The Department of Treasury adopted Bank Secrecy Act regulations for casinos because it determined that:
Casinos, as high cash volume businesses, are vulnerable to manipulation by money launderers, tax evaders, and other financial criminals; and
In addition to gaming, casinos offer their customers a broad array of financial services, such as deposit or credit accounts, funds transfers, check cashing and currency exchange services, that are similar to those offered by other financial institutions and other financial firms.
 
In recognition of the importance of the application of the Bank Secrecy Act to the gaming industry, the Money Laundering Suppression Act of 1994 added casinos and other gaming establishments to the list of financial institutions specified in the Bank Secrecy Act. Specifically, the definition of casino includes a casino, gambling casino or gaming establishment that is duly licensed or authorized to do business as such, and has gross annual gaming revenue in excess of $1 million, or that is an Indian gaming operations conducted under or pursuant to the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act other than a class I gaming operation.5
In 2002, FinCEN adopted rules requiring casinos, effective April 1, 2003, to file suspicious activity reports.
C. Current Challenges
Historically, casinos are no strangers to comprehensive regulation, and, as a result, simply do not pose the same types of risks as do money services businesses. Casinos have remained important partners in the fight against money laundering and financial crime. The challenge for FinCEN and the Internal Revenue Service is to determine how best to target casino examinations to deal with new issues, new products, and, importantly, new entrants to the industry. Providing outreach and guidance to the industry also will continue to be critical in assuring quality reporting and consistent compliance.
One facet of our efforts to coordinate with other federal regulators and law enforcement to identify issues and target our examination efforts is FinCEN’s participation on the Indian Gaming Working Group. The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Indian Country Unit established the Indian Gaming Working Group in February 2003 in an effort to identify and direct resources to Indian gaming matters and to focus on "national impact" cases. Indian Gaming Working Group’s members include, in addition to FinCEN, representatives from the FBI, the Department of Interior-Office of Inspector General, the National Indian Gaming Commission, the Internal Revenue Service Tribal Government Section, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The purpose of the Group is to identify, through a monthly review of Indian gaming cases deemed to have a significant impact on the Indian gaming industry, resources to address the most pressing criminal violations in the area of Indian gaming. FinCEN provides regulatory guidance pertaining to the Bank Secrecy Act and case support to law enforcement as appropriate.
In an effort to help casinos understand the importance of reporting requirements under the Bank Secrecy Act, we are stepping up our outreach programs. Last year we published Suspicious Activity Reporting Guidance for Casinos. We are now instituting programs at FinCEN to better monitor reporting under the Bank Secrecy Act to detect anomalies. Our new Office of Compliance will also be focusing on the casino industry as part of our efforts to enhance Bank Secrecy Act compliance. We are developing technological tools both in-house and in conjunction with the Internal Revenue Service that will enable us to develop sophisticated profiles of all financial institutions subject to regulation under the Bank Secrecy Act, not just casinos. This is our BSA Direct project about which I have spoken with you previously.
While BSA Direct is being developed, FinCEN has worked with the Detroit Computing Center to develop a monthly query to identify casinos with significant variances in their Bank Secrecy Act filings. The query compares the volume of casino currency transaction reports filed for the current month with the volume of currency transaction reports filed during the same month in the prior year. Based on the query, a report is produced which lists casinos whose currency transaction report filing volume has decreased by 30 percent or more. FinCEN has received and is analyzing the first report from the Enterprise Computing Center-Detroit, which compares data from January through August 2004 with data from January through August 2003. While this tool is not able to conduct the sophisticated monitoring that will be available through BSA Direct, this interim step should provide a rudimentary “early warning system” in the event of a catastrophic failure to file forms, as was experienced in the Mirage case. We believe such tools will enhance our capabilities to identify and address potential compliance programs.
Finally, we will continue to work closely with the industry and industry leaders such as the American Gaming Association, who you will hear from shortly.
III. Further Examination and Regulatory Implementation
Today our focus has been on money services businesses and casinos, yet the challenge of regulating all non-bank financial institutions is much larger. We will shortly issue final regulations requiring certain insurance companies and dealers in precious stones, metals, and jewels to establish anti-money laundering programs. There will be more industries that follow. Each new industry poses unique difficulties not only to FinCEN as the administrator of the Bank Secrecy Act, but also to the Internal Revenue Service as the examiner. We believe we are both doing all we can with present resource levels to attempt to achieve proper implementation of this regulatory regime, but the challenges are significant.
I would like to emphasize how we are working closely with the Internal Revenue Service on the issues associated with Bank Secrecy Act compliance in the non-bank financial sector. We believe that we are in this together and that we can only succeed if we work in close consultation. We meet monthly with the Internal Revenue Service to discuss examination issues, share information, and set priorities in a collaborative environment. FinCEN and the Internal Revenue Service also work together to train examiners, prepare education and outreach materials, participate in conferences and seminars, and prioritize and target examinations. FinCEN has conducted a comprehensive review of the Internal Revenue Service’s Bank Secrecy Act examination manual and offered our suggestions for improving processes based on our experience in the other financial services sectors. FinCEN also provides analytical, regulatory and interpretive support for Internal Revenue Service examiners. Recently, FinCEN has supported and facilitated the development of a Memorandum of Understanding that would permit sharing of Bank Secrecy Act examination information between the Internal Revenue Service and state regulators.
Finally, our discussion of Bank Secrecy Act examination and enforcement, especially in the non-bank context, would be incomplete without acknowledging the vital role played by the state-based regulatory authorities. While we do not delegate federal Bank Secrecy Act examination duties to the states, through their own authority and through similar regulatory regimes, the states apply their resources to these important duties. We have enjoyed a strong working relationship with our state regulatory partners and intend to enhance and supplement that relationship going forward to maximize the utility of scarce resources and to ensure the uniform application of our regulations.
IV. Conclusion
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I hope my testimony today conveys the sense of urgency, energy, and commitment with which all of us at the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network are trying to tackle these challenging issues. Notwithstanding all of that good work, a robust and properly resourced examination function is the keystone to the success of our effort. We must avoid at all costs the cynicism created by a regulatory paper tiger. We are keenly aware of the importance of this task – we know that it is critical to our national security. We are committed to all we can with the resources we have been give to implement this regulatory regime in the best way possible. Again, we appreciate your leadership, support and willingness to address these issues. Thank you.
1 See Coopers & Lyband L.L.P, “Non-Bank Financial Institutions: A Study of Five Sectors for the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network” (Feb. 28, 1997). This study estimated that there were approximately 158,000 money services business outlets or selling locations (not including Post Offices, which sell money orders and other money services business financial products, participants in stored value products trials, or sellers of various stored value or smart cards in use in e.g., public transportation systems); and provided financial services involving approximately $200 billion annually. This study estimated that, given trends current at the time, each money services business sector would grow at the following rates:
Check cashers:
11 % per year
Money Transmitters:
15 % per year
Money Orders and Traveler’s Checks:
5 % or less per year

2 Members of the second group may include, for example, a travel agency, courier service, convenience store, grocery or liquor store.
3 For example, at the time of the study, two money transmitters and two traveler’s check issuers made up approximately 97 percent of their respective known markets for non-bank money services. Three enterprises made up approximately 88 percent of the $100 billion in money orders sold annually (through approximately 146,000 locations). The retail foreign currency exchange sector was found by Coopers & Lybrand to be somewhat less concentrated, with the top two non-bank market participants accounting for 40 percent of a known market that accounts for $10 billion. Check cashing is the least concentrated of the business sectors; the two largest non-bank, check cashing businesses make up approximately 20 percent of the market, with a large number of competitors.
4 Businesses that are considered money services businesses solely because they serve as agents of another money services business are not required to register under current regulations; instead, the principal money services business must register and maintain a current list of its agents, which it must provide to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network or the Internal Revenue Service upon request.
5 The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, 25 U.S.C. 2701, establishes the jurisdictional framework that governs Indian gaming. The Act establishes three classes of games with a different regulatory scheme for each. Class I gaming is defined as traditional Indian gaming and social gaming for minimal prizes. Regulatory authority over class I gaming is vested exclusively in tribal governments.



Content



20040330.pdf49.23 KB

World Diamond Council 3rd Annual Meeting
Dubai-U.A.E.
March 30, 2004



I wish to thank His Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Tawfique Abdullah, CEO of the Dubai Metals and Commodities Center, and Eli Izhakoff and the other officers and members of the World Diamond Council for the opportunity to address this very important gathering. Opportunities like this to engage in dialogue underscore the importance of the ongoing dialogue and partnership between the diamond industry and governments of the world. This partnership is critical to identifying the possible ways in which criminals or terrorists may seek to exploit the most precious of stones, the diamond.
I think it is important at the outset to give you some background about myself and the agency I represent. I’m the Director of the United States Financial Crimes Enforcement Network – popularly known as FinCEN – which is an agency in the United States Treasury Department and the USA’s financial intelligence unit. FinCEN’s mission is quite simple – to safeguard the U.S. financial systems from the abuses imposed by criminals and terrorists. There are two points I would like to make about this mission that are, in my view, quite important. First, while FinCEN’s mission is focused on protection of the U.S. financial systems, we recognize that this is a global problem. Finance today knows no borders. It is important that we first understand and then work with our colleagues around the globe to address the challenges that confront the global community. Second, we are not so arrogant that we pretend we can address this problem alone. We are acutely aware that we cannot be successful in our mission without assistance and commitment from the private sector.
At FinCEN our work begins through the administration of a regulatory regime premised on security and transparency. The United States’ Bank Secrecy Act imposes controls upon the financial industry to seek to protect the system from those seeking to abuse it. It is a “risk based” regime that mandates the industry to develop anti-money laundering plans custom tailored to address the industry member’s customer base and the business that it conducts. The Bank Secrecy Act also requires the reporting of suspicious activities and other important financial information to FinCEN. We collect and maintain that information and ensure that it is made available – under appropriate circumstances – to law enforcement and to other financial intelligence units around the world. In addition to making this information available, we analyze the information we collect – from both a tactical and strategic perspective. It is our hope that our analysis not only contributes to law enforcement’s work on issues relating to illicit finance, but also contributes to a better understanding by financial industry of the risks the industries we regulate face from illicit finance.
So, I am sure many are asking why the United State’s financial intelligence unit is addressing the diamond industry. I am here to do what one might expect – to give you an overview of Title III of the USA PATRIOT Act, landmark legislation passed in the wake of the September 11th attacks on the United States that enhanced our anti-money laundering regime and how that legislation will affect the diamond industry. But perhaps more importantly, I hope to highlight some of what we see as the vulnerabilities of the commodities trade – including the diamond and jewelry industry – to abuse by criminals and terrorists. Mr. Oppenheimer of DeBeers said it best this morning – foremost amongst the challenges facing your industry “is the vulnerability of the diamond and jewelry industry – as with other commodities – to misuse and abuse by criminals and the perpetrators of terror. . . . In a world where our personal security, that of our families and communities, is under a real and present threat, we must take notice and take action.”
I. Commodities and Money Laundering
Money laundering is a necessity for any profit-generating criminal activity and those that engage in it are always looking for the weakest points in whatever regulatory regime we erect. Not too long ago criminals in the United States favored dumping large amounts of cash into banks. But, as regulatory regimes and controls were put in place, and as the banking industry became aware of the problem, and as we continued to study the problem, we began to understand that criminals use other types of financial institutions to launder their illicit funds, institutions such as securities brokers, casinos, or even insurance companies.
The illicit trade in commodities by criminals – including precious metals and stones – is an issue that has increasingly caught the attention of respective government officials. Within this context the use of precious stones and precious metals to launder illicit proceeds has further come to the forefront as being vulnerable to money laundering. To illustrate this vulnerability I want to briefly highlight an operation that illustrates how precious metals can be used to launder illicit funds.
In a recent U.S. law enforcement investigation certain narcotic traffickers in the New York area were identified as converting bulk cash proceeds into gold followed by the gold being smuggled to Colombia. Working in conjunction with corrupt jewelers, bulk cash was delivered to the jewelers in exchange for gold. Once converted, the gold was further moved to Colombia through couriers or smuggled by concealing the gold in various items and/or product. As a method to further disguise the gold prior to it being moved to Colombia, some of the jewelers molded the gold in the shapes of belt buckles, tools, bolts, etc. Once the gold was smuggled to Colombia, it was sold for pesos in order to fund additional narcotics trafficking.
The example I have just cited is noteworthy for two principle reasons: it is typical of a trade-based mechanism that characterizes the largest money laundering systems in the Western Hemisphere – something commonly referred to in our circles as the black market peso exchange system. Secondly, the criminal has managed to bring in a commodity in the quintessential currency for illegal black market trafficking throughout the world.
It is generally accepted that the black market peso exchange is a way that drug proceeds generated in the United States are laundered. In brief, drug proceeds are being used to fund the purchase of commodities such as appliances, alcohol products, cigarettes and electronics into Colombia from such markets as Aruba, Panama, Venezuela, Asia and the United States, with devastating consequences to Colombia’s legal business community. The scheme has created a very uneven playing field for the legitimate businesses that are confronted with criminally financed commodities with a built-in competitive edge.
The need to address the black market peso exchange came not only from law enforcement but as importantly, from businesses that wanted a level playing field and to preserve the legitimacy of their trade. A number of companies argued that the time had come for these major corporations to exercise “due diligence” in their international dealings.
Crucial alliances began to form between the private and public sectors to tackle this systemic problem. Businesses, banks and law enforcement began a dialogue to devise solutions allowing law enforcement to go after the main perpetrators and beneficiaries of the scheme - the money brokers. At the same time, this dialogue prompted businesses to assess their own vulnerabilities to money laundering and address them. What many of the established companies did not want is their reputation tarnished by the activities of a criminal minority.
We believe the diamond industry could be confronted with a similar situation. And we believe the industry stands to benefit from a similar public-private partnership.
The very characteristics of the diamond that make it so valuable may also be the characteristics that make it appealing to criminals and criminal networks. Diamonds have relatively stable prices and can pass undetected across borders and through customs. They can serve as an international medium of exchange and are easy to buy and sell outside the formal banking system. You are all aware of the widely published studies of the use of diamonds by terrorists by NGOs and journalists. Although evidence to prove the connections between diamonds and terrorists is still being developed, we are receiving enough information from government agencies, private concerns and the industry to warrant a closer examination of the problem.
Just as countries around the globe have made significant progress in implementing financial transparency, I believe we must begin a cooperative effort aimed at addressing issues related to trade transparency. Any such effort should – in my view – be taken collaboratively with the private sector. Your industry can be proud of the efforts taken to address the terrible problems associated with conflict diamonds. The Kimberly Process is a very important step to begin to add transparency in the trade of rough “conflict” diamonds. We believe efforts to add transparency to other aspects of the diamond trade should be pursued – and let me submit to you that it is in your interest to add transparency to the legitimate diamond trade. Such transparency will focus law enforcement and other government’s efforts where it should be – on the illegitimate trade – particularly on any such trade involving terrorists, or their financial facilitators.
II. The US Regulatory Regime
In the United States, our principal focus over the past two years has been implementing the sweeping changes to our anti-money laundering regime occasioned by the USA PATRIOT Act. Generally, the Act sought to accomplish the following: first, to enhance our ability to share information important financial information; second, to protect the international gateways to the U.S. financial system, the correspondent account; third, to prescribe uniform customer identification verification procedures for all financial institutions opening accounts; and fourth, to expand our anti-money laundering regime to all categories of financial institutions whose services may be abused by money launderers or terrorists.
The Patriot Act required us to expand our basic anti-money laundering regime to a wide range of industries that had previously not been subject to regulation. This includes dealers in precious metals, stones or jewels. While new to the US, regulation of this industry is not new to our European colleagues: European Union Directives as well as most European Union member and accession countries have already established regulations addressing this sector. The decision to expand our regulatory regime to include these industries is based in large part on the assessment that these industries are potentially vulnerable to abuse and the experience of law enforcement.
We have issued for public discussion and comment a regulatory regime that will require dealers in precious metals, stones or jewels to establish anti-money laundering programs. The proposed regulation would require dealers to have a written anti-money laundering program that is reasonably designed to detect and prevent money laundering or the financing of terrorism. Our focus in the proposed rule is on those businesses in the United States that both buy and sell the items. For example, a pure retailer, regardless of size, that purchased its stock solely from dealers subject to our proposed rule, would not itself be subject to our proposed rule. We sought to tailor our regulation to those businesses that engaged in the type of transactions that may be susceptible to abuse. If criminals purchase diamonds or gems, they eventually have to sell them or trade them; this is our focus.
Our approach to anti-money laundering regulation is risk-based. We believe effective implementation must be predicated upon an institution’s careful assessment of its vulnerabilities to money laundering and other financial crime. This is especially important in this industry. You know your business better than we ever will. As a result, we ask that you build an anti-money laundering program that makes sense for your institution and its customers. FinCEN expects each institution to assess its vulnerabilities according to its lines of business, types of customers, and geographic locations served.
Our approach requires a commitment on behalf of the industry. The industry must – from the very top of the organizations – seriously assess the risks it has for money laundering and other financial crime. Then the organization must design and implement a plan – within the guidelines and guidance provided by the regulator – that will address and minimize those risks. While this approach is, in some ways, more challenging for the industry, it results in a regulatory regime that ultimately imposes less burden and operates more effectively.
Equally as important to the success of a risk-based regulatory regime is that the regulator must provide constant and consistent regulatory guidance– formal and informal – using every technology available to us to reach the regulated industry. In other words, we have a responsibility under this approach to provide you with “guideposts,” within which you can design your program. More importantly, the regulator under this system must share information about risks and vulnerabilities faced by the industry it regulates. An industry cannot be expected to design an anti-money laundering program custom tailored to address risks, if the industry does not know what those risks are. That is our job and it will not be easy. It also requires that our regulatory regime must never become static. We must continually critically assess our regime and ensure that it addresses – in the broadest sense – the risks posed to our system.
Your industry should be commended for taking a proactive approach working with the NGO community to address a number of other very serious issues surrounding the diamond trade. To your credit, you and your leaders acknowledged that specific failings and weaknesses exist and can be exploited, and there is an urgent need to grapple with the issues and preserve the integrity of the industry. Please know that you have my commitment and the commitment of my agency, to work with you cooperatively and collaboratively to proceed together to address the risks associated with the illicit diamond trade – particularly those risks posed by those who would facilitate terror.
The word diamond stems from the Greek word adamas that means “unconquerable.” Diamonds are truly unconquerable – not only for their indestructibility, but even more for what they represent when given to a loved one. I look forward to working with all of you to continue to safeguard the integrity of this industry.
Thank you very much.
 



