Content



049.pdf24.64 KB



One individual has pled guilty to multiple counts of money laundering, filing false tax returns, failing to file Reports of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FinCEN Form TD F 90-22.) and illegally transferring funds to Iran. The plea agreement also requires forfeiture of over half a million dollars. Sentencing is pending. Law enforcement officers learned about the activity and initiated the investigation because of a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) that a brokerage firm filed in October 2001.The individual is a naturalized U.S. citizen originally from Iran. In 2002, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) executed a search warrant at his residence where the seized evidence revealed strong support for the current Iranian fundamentalist regime and the late Ayatollah Khomeini.The individual pled guilty to multiple counts of illegal money transfers to Iran. Pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), former President Clinton signed Executive Orders prohibiting any new investments in Iran by a U.S. person. Violating IEEPA carries a potential penalty of a $250,000 fine, 10 years imprisonment, or both.In order to disguise the illicit nature of the transfers, the individual sent several million dollars from his brokerage account to banks in foreign jurisdictions, which in turn transferred the funds to a bank in Iran between 2001and 2002, in violation of the embargo prohibiting new investments in Iran. When the brokerage firm learned that the ultimate destination of the funds was Iran, it refused to execute any further transfer orders for the individual, and advised the individual that sending funds to Iran was illegal. The individual then on several occasions used alternative remittance systems to transfer more than $100,000 from the United States to Iran. The individual’s guilty plea included violations of IEEPA.The money laundering violations resulted from transfers and attempts to transfer over half a million dollars from the United States to foreign jurisdictions with the intent to promote a specified unlawful activity, that is, IEEPA violations. Sometimes referred to as the “clean money laundering” provision, there is no requirement that the funds utilized be illegally obtained.The case began in the days immediately following the September 11 terrorist attacks. Through SARs filed by the securities and futures industries, the Federal Bureau of Investigation identified transactions whereby the individual had sent a substantial amount of money to foreign jurisdictions early in 2001, and determined that this activity was not consistent with the individual’s normal pattern of transactions. When asked about the activity, the individual admitted that the funds were destined for Iran.(Investigating Agencies: Federal Bureau of Investigation; Immigration and Customs Enforcement; Internal Revenue Service – Criminal Investigation Division; U.S Attorney’s Office.)
[Published in The SAR Activity Review – Trends, Tips & Issues, Issue 11, May 2007]


Tags

Broker Dealers
Involving SARs
Other Crimes




Content


PDF

faq060305.pdf98.76 KB


FAQ

Issued Date
May 03, 2005



Guidance Subject
Frequently Asked Questions

Interim Final Rule - Anti-Money Laundering Programs for Dealers in Precious Metals, Stones, or Jewels
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (“FinCEN”) is issuing these frequently asked questions (“FAQs”) regarding the application of its interim final rule implementing section 352 of the USA PATRIOT ACT and requiring dealers in precious metals, stones or jewels to establish anti-money laundering programs. FinCEN is providing these FAQs to assist dealers in precious metals, precious stones, and jewels in understanding the scope and application of the interim final rule.
1. Why is FinCEN issuing a regulation requiring dealers in precious metals, stones, and jewels to establish an anti-money laundering program? As with all of FinCEN’s regulations requiring the establishment of an anti-money laundering program, FinCEN is issuing this regulation to better protect those who deal in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones from potential abuse by criminals and terrorists, thereby enhancing the protection of the U.S. financial system generally, and the precious metals, jewels and precious stones industry in particular. The characteristics of jewels, precious metals, and precious stones that make them valuable also make them potentially vulnerable to those seeking to launder money. This regulation is a key step in ensuring that the Bank Secrecy Act is applied appropriately to these businesses. Recognizing the need for a more comprehensive anti-money laundering regime, Congress passed, and the President signed into the law, the USA PATRIOT Act, which, among other things, requires that all persons defined as financial institutions for Bank Secrecy Act purposes establish anti-money laundering programs. The Act further directs the Secretary of the Treasury to prescribe through regulation minimum standards for such programs. A dealer in jewels, precious metals, or precious stones is defined as a “financial institution” under the Bank Secrecy Act, and this regulation fulfills that mandate of the USA PATRIOT Act.
2. Why is this being issued as an “Interim Final” rule? Will it change? FinCEN is issuing this rule as an interim final rule to give us the flexibility to more narrowly tailor certain aspects of the rule in response to our request within this rule for additional public comment on four discrete issues, while still ensuring that dealers immediately begin to develop anti-money laundering programs. Through the course of the rulemaking process and in developing a final rule, FinCEN has identified several important issues that would affect the scope of the regulation but on which it received little or no public comment. Thus, to ensure an effective and appropriately focused regulation, FinCEN seeks public comment regarding the following issues: (1) Should silver be removed from the definition of a “precious metal?” (2) Should “precious stones” and “jewels” be defined more specifically, for example, by reference to a minimum price per carat, and if so, how? (3) Is 50 percent the appropriate value threshold for determining whether finished goods (including jewelry) containing jewels, precious metals, or precious stones should be subject to the rule? (4) In addition, FinCEN is again requesting comments on the potential impact of the rule on small businesses (including manufacturers, dealers, wholesalers, distributors, and retailers) that may be “dealers” subject to the provisions of the rule. FinCEN will be soliciting comments for 45 days after publication of the interim final rule in the Federal Register. After the end of the comment period, FinCEN will review all comments received and determine whether any further changes should be made in the final rule. At this time, FinCEN will only consider comments addressing the issues outlined above, and FinCEN anticipates that changes, if any, will be made before January 1, 2006, the date that dealers are required to implement their anti-money laundering programs. Dealers covered by the interim final rule are expected to begin developing anti-money laundering programs in accordance with the terms of the interim final rule. Any changes that FinCEN makes to the rule would likely reduce compliance burdens on dealers.
3. Who is covered by this regulation? The interim final rule applies to “dealers” in “covered goods.” “Covered goods” include jewels, precious metals, and precious stones, and finished goods (including but not limited to, jewelry, numismatic items, and antiques) that derive 50 percent or more of their value from jewels, precious metals, or precious stones contained in or attached to such finished goods. FinCEN has defined the term “dealer” as it is commonly understood: A person who both purchases and sells covered goods. Additionally, FinCEN has included dollar thresholds in the definition of dealer: A person must have purchased at least $50,000, and sold at least $50,000, worth of covered goods during the preceding year. The dollar threshold is intended to ensure that the rule only applies to persons engaged in the business of buying and selling a significant amount of these items, rather than to small businesses, occasional “dealers,” and persons dealing in such items for hobby purposes. Significantly, the interim final rule distinguishes between a dealer and “retailer” of covered goods. FinCEN has defined the term retailer as a person engaged within the U.S. in sales of covered goods, primarily to the public. FinCEN believes that retailers, as defined, do not pose the same level of risk for money laundering as do dealers. Thus, most retailers will not be required to establish anti-money laundering programs. So long as retailers generally purchase their covered goods from U.S.-based dealers and other retailers, the retailers will not be required to establish anti-money laundering programs. Thus, retailers that, for example, purchase excess inventory from other retailers from time to time would still be covered by the retailer exemption. Under the interim final rule, a retailer that purchases up to $50,000 of covered goods from persons other than U.S.-based dealers or retailers is covered by the retailer exemption. However, if during the prior tax or calendar year a retailer both purchased more than $50,000 of covered goods from persons other than U.S. dealers or retailers (such as non-U.S. dealers and members of the general public), and sold more than $50,000 of covered goods, then the retailer would be deemed to be a “dealer” and would have to develop and implement an anti-money laundering program. Under such circumstances, the anti-money laundering program would only be required to address purchases from non-U.S. dealers (including members of the general public) for the following year; the program would not be required to address sales. Finally, businesses licensed or registered as pawnbrokers under state or municipal law are specifically exempted from the definition of “dealer” for purposes of the interim final rule. Therefore, pawnbrokers are not required to establish anti-money laundering programs under this rule as long as they are properly licensed or registered with the appropriate state or local government and engaged in pawn transactions.
3(a) Is the purchase and sale of jewelry and other finished goods containing jewels, precious metals, or precious stones subject to the rule as well? The purchase and sale of jewelry and other finished goods containing jewels, precious metals or precious stones would subject a person to the rule, only if such jewelry or other finished goods derive at least 50 percent of their value from the jewels, precious metals or precious stones they contain. The purpose of this distinction is to ensure that FinCEN does not regulate a wide variety of goods whose value is not primarily derived from the jewels, precious metals or precious stones they contain.
3(b) How do I determine whether I have purchased and sold $50,000 worth of jewels, precious metals or precious stones? The $50,000 threshold is based solely on the value of jewels, precious metals, and precious stones that were purchased and sold during the prior year. For example, if a business purchases and sells jewelry, at least 50 percent of the value of which is derived from jewels, precious metals, or precious stones, the $50,000 threshold is calculated based on the value of the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones contained in such jewelry, not on the overall value of the jewelry. This distinction ensures that the focus of the rule remains on jewels, precious metals, and precious stones, not on value due to other reasons.
3(c) How do I determine whether the businesses from which I purchase my covered goods are “dealers” or other “retailers” for purposes of the interim final rule? FinCEN expects persons engaged in the business of buying and selling covered goods to take reasonable steps to determine whether a supplier is covered by this interim final rule or whether the supplier is eligible for the retailer exemption. Reasonable steps will depend on the nature of the relationship between the supplier and the person purchasing the items. FinCEN understands that the jewel, precious metal, and precious stone industry is one often characterized by personal relationships. Accordingly, in most cases, FinCEN anticipates that the verbal or written representations of the supplier will be sufficient. However, in other cases, additional due diligence will be required.
3(d) In 2005, I will purchase more than $50,000 in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones that I use to manufacture inexpensive jewelry that I sell to retail stores. Will I be required to have an anti-money laundering program in 2006? If the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones in your jewelry account for 50 percent or more of the selling price of the jewelry, and the value of the jewels, precious metals and precious stones contained in the jewelry you sell exceeds $50,000, you will be required to have an anti-money laundering program. If only some of your jewelry derives 50 percent or more of its selling price (the price at which you sell it to the retail stores, not the price that the retail stores will charge their customers) from jewels, precious metals, or precious stones, you only need to count the value of the jewels, precious metals, or precious stones in that jewelry towards your $50,000 “sales” threshold. The focus of this rule is on the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones – not on the jewelry or other finished items. Therefore, only jewelry (and other finished goods) that derive at least 50 percent of their value from the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones are subject to this rule. The anti-money laundering program should focus on realistic money-laundering risks, based on the experience of the industry and government. FinCEN believes that these thresholds help to better focus the rule on those risks, and will be periodically issuing information to the industry regarding its knowledge and experience with money laundering risks to this industry.
3(e) I sell precious stones primarily to the public, but my supplier is a foreign company. Am I required to establish an anti-money laundering program? If, during 2005, you purchase more than $50,000 in precious stones from your foreign supplier, and sell more than $50,000 in precious stones, you must develop and implement an anti-money laundering program by January 1, 2006. But, because you are a retailer, your anti-money laundering program would only need to address the money laundering risks associated with the purchases from your foreign supplier.
3(f) Are trade-in transactions “purchases” under this rule? Not for the purpose of defining who is a dealer subject to the rule.1 FinCEN has learned that it is quite common for dealers and retailers in covered goods to allow retail customers to trade-in existing items for credit against the purchase of a new item. Therefore, so long as the value of the trade-in is credited to the account of the customer, and so long as a dealer or a retailer does not provide funds to the customer in exchange for the trade-in, these transactions need not be taken into account in determining the dollar value of covered goods purchased. The trade-in exception only applies for purposes of determining who is a “dealer,” and not to the scope of the anti-money laundering program required of a dealer. Therefore, a dealer that is not a retailer would be required to evaluate the risks posed by trade-in transactions in determining the appropriate program requirements, as it would with other transactions in covered goods.
3(g) I am a retail jeweler who sometimes buys jewelry from the general public, which I re-sell in my store. Am I required to have an anti-money laundering program? You would be required to establish an anti-money laundering program only if, during the prior calendar or tax year: (1) You sold jewelry containing more than $50,000 in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones, and the value of the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones comprised 50 percent or more of the selling price of the jewelry; and (2) You purchased from the general public jewelry containing more than $50,000 in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones, and the value of the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones comprised 50 percent or more of the purchase price of the jewelry. If you are required to have an anti-money laundering program, it would only need to address the risks associated with purchases from the public of jewelry that derives 50 percent or more of its value from jewels, precious stones, or precious metals. It would not need to address your sale of covered goods.
3(h) I purchase jewels, precious stones, and precious metals for the purpose of making and selling decorative consumer goods. Do I have to establish an anti-money laundering program? If you sell your goods primarily to the public, you are a retailer and do not have to establish an anti-money laundering program, unless during the prior tax or calendar year: (1) The value of the jewels, precious stones and precious metals contained in the goods you sold was more than $50,000, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals comprised 50 percent or more of the selling price of those goods; and (2) You purchased more than $50,000 in jewels, precious stones, and precious metals from either foreign sources or the general public, in which case your program need address only those sources of supply. If you are not a retailer, you must establish an anti-money laundering program if, during the prior tax or calendar year: (1) You purchased more than $50,000 in jewels, precious stones, and precious metals from any source of supply; and (2) The value of the jewels, precious stones and precious metals contained in the goods you sold was more than $50,000, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals comprised 50 percent or more of the selling price of those goods.
3(i) I am an antiques dealer who purchases and sells items that contain jewels, precious metals or precious stones. Am I required to have an anti-money laundering program? If you sell your antiques primarily to the public, you are a retailer and do not have to establish an anti-money laundering program, unless during 2005: (1) The value of the jewels, precious stones and precious metals contained in the antiques you sold was more than $50,000, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals comprised 50 percent or more of the selling price of those antiques; and (2) You purchased antiques from foreign sources or the general public that contained more than $50,000 in jewels, precious stones, and precious metals, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals comprised 50 percent or more of the purchase price of those antiques; in which case your program need address only those sources of supply. If you are not a retailer because, for example, you sell your antiques equally to other antiques dealers as well as the general public, you must establish an anti-money laundering program if, during 2005: (1) The value of the jewels, precious stones and precious metals contained in the antiques you purchased was more than $50,000, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals accounted for 50 percent or more of the purchase price of those antiques; and (2) You sold antiques that contained more than $50,000 in jewels, precious stones, or precious metals, and the value of the jewels, precious stones, and precious metals comprised 50 percent or more of the selling price of those antiques. In all cases, it is only the value of the jewels, precious metals, and precious stones in the antiques that matters, not the value of the antiques themselves. Because of price “mark-ups” it is possible that the precious metals in an antique you purchased accounted for more than 50 percent of its purchase price, but less than 50 percent of its selling price when you sold it. If this is the case, you would need to count the purchase toward your $50,000 “purchases” threshold, but the sale would not count toward your “sales” threshold.
3(j) What about the purchase of jewels, precious stones, or precious metals for use in machinery or equipment to be used for industrial purposes? If a business manufactures such equipment and sells it, is that business subject to this rule? No. The purchase of jewels, precious metals, and precious stones for use in industrial products, and the purchase or sale of such products, appears to be less susceptible to money laundering and terrorist financing risks, due to the fact that precious metals, precious stones, and jewels typically do not constitute a significant component of the value of an industrial product. Therefore, persons who engage in these activities are not dealers to the extent of such activities for purposes of the interim final rule.
4(a) What are the requirements for the anti-money laundering program? At a minimum, dealers must establish an anti-money laundering program that comprises the four elements set forth below. FinCEN offers the following guidance to assist dealers in the development of their program. However, this guidance does not supplant the terms of the interim final rule, and the steps required in any one particular case will depend on the unique circumstances of each business:
(1) Policies, procedures, and internal controls, based on the dealer’s assessment of the money laundering and terrorist financing risk associated with its business, that are reasonably designed to enable the dealer to comply with the applicable requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and to prevent the dealer from being used for money laundering or terrorist financing. You should learn what the Bank Secrecy Act requirements are for your business. For most dealers, the requirements are (1) to establish an anti-money laundering program, (2) to file IRS/FinCEN Form 8300,2 (3) to file FinCEN Form TD F 90-22.13, and (4) to file FinCEN Form 105.4 All of these forms and their instructions are available at www.fincen.gov. As the preamble to the interim final rule describes, you should assess the extent to which your particular business is susceptible to money laundering and terrorist financing. For example, business you conduct with other U.S. dealers subject to the rule, and established customers or suppliers, presents a relatively low level of risk. On the other hand, business conducted with parties located in, or transactions for which payment or account reconciliation is routed through accounts located in, jurisdictions that have been identified as particularly vulnerable to money laundering or terrorist financing, present a significantly higher risk, and therefore require greater diligence for detecting transactions that may involve money laundering or terrorist financing. You should look at the FinCEN website for information and updates on money laundering and terrorist financing risks, as they apply to your industry. You should talk with colleagues in your industry and consult industry trade associations to learn what the best practices are among dealers. Finally, you should consider all of the things that you learn in the context of your own business. FinCEN does not expect that this program can prevent all potential money laundering. What is expected is that your business will take prudent steps, with the same kind of thought and care that you take to guard against other crimes, such as theft or fraud.
(2) A compliance officer who is responsible for ensuring that the program is implemented effectively. The compliance officer is an employee or group of employees who will be responsible for the day-to-day operation of your anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing program. This person will be responsible on a day-to-day basis for ensuring that the steps within your own program are fully implemented. As such, this person should be someone with enough authority to achieve this important task. The amount of time devoted to these duties will depend on the level of risk. A dealer is not required to designate a person to serve on a full-time basis as a compliance officer for purposes of the interim final rule, unless the level of risk or volume of transactions warrants that. If your business faces very high level of risk for money laundering or terrorist financing, then much will be required of this person. If your exposure to these risks is more moderate, then the level of effort will be commensurate with that risk. In all cases, however, the compliance officer should be thoroughly familiar with the operations of the business itself and with all aspects of your anti-money laundering program, as well as with the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and applicable FinCEN forms, and should have read carefully all applicable documents issued by FinCEN or on FinCEN’s webpage.
(3) Ongoing training of appropriate persons concerning their responsibilities under the program. You should first consider what training is appropriate for each individual employee. Some employees may require no training on the program, because of their duties. Others may require a great deal of training. The training should be clearly understood by your employees, and the compliance officer should be available to answer all questions posed by employees. Remember that you should periodically retrain your employees on your program as may be necessary to ensure that they understand and can fully implement your program.
(4) Independent testing to monitor and maintain an adequate program. Some person or group of people who are not working specifically for the compliance officer on the anti-money laundering program should be selected to determine whether the program has been appropriately implemented and is working. For example, if the program requires that a particular employee be trained once every six months, then the independent testing should determine whether the training occurred and whether the training was adequate. Independent testing does not mean that an outside party must be hired, although outside parties may be utilized to conduct the independent review. It does mean, though, that the testing should be a fair and unbiased appraisal of the success in implementing the anti-money laundering program, and the results of the independent testing should be put into writing, including any recommendations for improvement. Independent testers should carefully consider all the decisions made by the compliance officer, such as the level of risk faced by the dealer for money laundering and terrorist financing, the frequency of training, etc. However, the decision as to how best to establish and operate the program is not a task for the independent tester. The independent testing is intended to confirm that the program operates properly. 4(b) What resources are available to help me establish an adequate program? The preamble to the interim final rule, and these FAQs, provide the foundation for dealers to begin the process of establishing their own anti-money laundering programs. Going forward, FinCEN will issue additional guidance to this industry. All such guidance will be posted in FinCEN’s website, www.fincen.gov. Additionally, FinCEN operates a regulatory helpline, 1-800-949-2732, to provide answers to specific compliance questions. Finally, FinCEN will continue to work with the Internal Revenue Service, which has been delegated the authority to examine dealers for compliance with the interim final rule and other Bank Secrecy Act requirements, to provide outreach and training about anti-money laundering issues.
5(a) When do I have to implement my anti-money laundering program? As explained above, you first need to determine whether, based on your business activities during calendar year 2005, you are required to have an anti-money laundering program for 2006. (If the calendar year is not the same as your tax year, you may use your tax year instead.) If you are required to have an anti-money laundering program for 2006, it has to be implemented by January 1, 2006, or six months after that date you become subject to the anti-money laundering program requirement. You should start developing your program as soon as you can to be sure you have it in place by that date.
5(b) I am not required to have an anti-money laundering program for 2006. Will I need to have one in 2007? If you are not required to establish an anti-money laundering program based on your 2005 business activities, you will need to assess your 2006 business activities to see if you have to establish an anti-money laundering program in 2007, which would have to be in place beginning six months after the date you become subject to the anti-money laundering program requirement. The same assessment needs to be made every year to determine if you will be required to have an anti-money laundering program the following year.
5(c) I am required to have an anti-money laundering program for 2006. How long must it continue? If you are required to establish an anti-money laundering program for 2006, you must maintain it as long as you continue to be a “dealer” under the rule. If, based on your business activities for 2006, you no longer satisfy the criteria for being a dealer, you do not need to continue your anti-money laundering program in 2007. But you will need to assess your business activities in 2007 to see if you need to re-implement your program in 2008.
6. Am I required to file Suspicious Activity Reports as part of my anti-money laundering program? The interim final rule requires dealers to establish anti-money laundering programs but does not require dealers to file reports of suspicious activity with FinCEN. However, dealers are strongly encouraged to file suspicious activity reports when they suspect the transaction or the funds involved has/have an illegal source or purpose or when the transaction has no apparent business or lawful purpose. Where appropriate, dealers should immediately contact law enforcement or FinCEN through its hotline. An integral part of a dealer’s anti-money laundering program is an assessment of the risks and vulnerabilities of the business and the development of policies, procedures and internal controls to address those risks. This should include procedures and controls for identifying “suspicious” activities and dealing with them accordingly. Procedures for dealing with suspicious activities may include guidance for when it is appropriate in the context of the business and the activity to (1) contact local or federal law enforcement authorities, (2) file a suspicious activity report with FinCEN (FinCEN recommends using the Money Services Business SAR Form TD F 90-22.56, available at https://www.fincen.gov/resources/filing-information), (3) check the “suspicious activity” box on a Form 8300 filed on a particular transaction, or (4) report suspected terrorist activities to FinCEN using its Financial Institutions Hotline (1-866-556-3974). Any dealer, or any of its officers, directors, employees or agents, that makes a voluntary SAR filing shall not be liable to any person under federal, state or local law, or under an arbitration contract, for such a filing or for failing to provide notice of the filing to the subject of the filing.5 We also caution, however, that a dealer, or any of its officers, directors, employees, or agents, that makes a voluntary SAR filing may not notify any person involved in the reported transaction that a SAR has been filed.6
7. Do I still need to report cash receipts of in excess of $10,000 on Form 8300? Yes. Nothing in the interim final rule affects the existing obligation of a business to report cash receipts in excess of $10,000 in one transaction, or two or more related transactions, on Form 8300. 31 C.F.R. 103.30. In particular, businesses excluded from this interim final rule are not relieved of their existing obligation to file Form 8300. To the contrary, FinCEN regards the filing of Form 8300 as an essential reporting component of the Bank Secrecy Act, especially for this industry that does not presently have a suspicious activity reporting obligation.
1 Trade-in transactions also are not considered “purchases” for purposes of determining whether a retailer qualifies for the retailer exception to the definition of “dealer.”
2 Reports relating to currency in excess of $10,000 received in a trade or business, see 31 CFR 103.30.
3 Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts, see 31 CFR 103.24.
4 Report of International Transportation of Currency or Monetary Instruments, see 31 CFR 103.23.
5 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(3).
6 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)(A).

Financial Institution

Precious Metals/Jewelry Industry




Content


PDF

fin-2009-g004.pdf141.35 KB


FIN-2009-G004

Issued Date
September 30, 2009



Guidance Subject
Frequently Asked Questions Casino Record keeping, Reporting, and Compliance Program Requirements

This document provides guidance interpreting the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act ("BSA") regulations1 as they apply to the casino and card club industries in the United States. We additionally published frequently asked questions for casinos and card clubs as FIN-2007-G005 on November 14, 2007. Casinos and card clubs may continue to rely on the guidance contained in FIN-2007-G005, which has not been incorporated into this publication.
Section A: 31 C.F.R. § 103.11 Casino and Card Club DefinitionsQuestion 1: Do Nevada slot route operators operate "casinos" for purposes of rules implementing the BSA?
Answer 1: A Nevada slot route operator is a gaming licensee who, pursuant to a participation agreement, owns and maintains slot machines at three or more business establishments. The business establishments are owned and operated by other persons.2 While it is common for Nevada slot route operators to lease space from a property owner (usually referred to as a "space lease agreement"), and to pay a monthly rental payment to such a landlord, the Nevada slot route operator may have its own "nonrestricted" license to conduct gaming on the premises.3 A Nevada slot route operator with a "nonrestricted " license to conduct gaming at a business establishment would be operating a "casino" at the business establishment for purposes of FinCEN's BSA rules,4 if gross annual gaming revenue of its operations at the business establishment exceeds $1 million.5 Question 2: Are gaming or gambling establishments with gross annual gaming revenue of $1,000,000 or less subject to any BSA requirements?
Answer 2: Yes. The requirement to file a FinCEN/IRS Form 8300, Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business, for currency6 received in a trade or business applies to businesses that are not casinos or financial institutions under FinCEN's rules. The term "cash" for Form 8300 reporting purposes includes coin and currency of the United States or any other country, and may include cashier's checks, bank drafts, traveler's checks, or money orders received over $10,000 in one transaction (or two or more related transactions) during a 12-month period.7 For purposes of illustration, the following gaming and gambling establishments or nongaming related businesses normally would be subject to Form 8300 requirements:8 (i) casinos or card clubs with gross annual gaming revenue of $1,000,000 or less; (ii) tribal bingo halls, off-track betting parlors, greyhound tracks, horse race tracks, or (iii) a casino hotel, gift shop, cater/banquet service, conference/seminar facilities,10 etc. The BSA prohibits any person from structuring transactions to evade reporting or recordkeeping requirements under the BSA.11 Section B: 31 C.F.R. § 103.22 Currency Transaction Reporting RequirementsQuestion 3: What is the definition of a gaming day and what effect does it have on aggregating a customer's reportable currency transactions?
Answer 3: A gaming day is defined as the normal business day of a casino or card club. If a casino or card club offers 24-hour gaming, the term "gaming day" means that 24-hour period by which a casino or card club keeps its books and records for business, accounting, and tax purposes.12 A casino or card club must have only one gaming day, which is common to all its gambling operating divisions or departments. Maintaining one gaming day facilitates the aggregation of transactions for purposes of currency transaction reporting.Question 4: Is a card club required to file FinCEN Form 103, Currency Transaction Report by Casinos ("CTRC"), for customer currency buy-ins at poker games?
Answer 4: Yes. When a customer at a poker table buys-in13 for more than $10,000 in chips with currency, in a single transaction or a series of related transactions in the same gaming day, a card club must assure compliance with CTRC requirements for such transactions. The same would apply to other non-house banked card games (e.g., games commonly referred to as "California Games"14 in certain card clubs or card rooms). If the card club has knowledge of the transactions, it must report the transactions on a CTRC.15
A card club must implement a program reasonably designed to assure compliance with the BSA.16 For the reporting of transactions in currency, regardless of whether a card club has a multiple transaction log, it must have a system of internal controls, procedures for using all available information to determine and verify, when required, the name, address, Social Security or Taxpayer Identification Number, and other identifying information for a person, as well as train personnel.17
In addition, BSA rules impose record retention requirements on card clubs.18 These requirements are independent of the requirement to implement a program for ensuring compliance with the BSA. FinCEN understands that many card clubs have internal controls that include a multiple transaction log to record currency transactions above a given threshold (usually $2,500 - $3,000). A card club that prepares or uses records of currency transactions, including currency transaction logs or multiple currency transaction logs, must retain the records.19 Also, the record retention requirement applies to transactions conducted in card or poker rooms located within the facilities of casinos. Also, please note that to comply with regulations implementing the BSA, card clubs may need to prepare and retain records not otherwise produced in the ordinary course of business.20 Similarly, a casino that prepares or uses multiple transaction logs or other records for monitoring the gaming activity of a customer (e.g., in a poker room) must retain the records.21Question 5: Must a casino or card club have an internal control for customer chip redemptions at a cage?
Answer 5: Yes. Casinos and card clubs are required to develop and implement written programs that are reasonably designed to assure compliance with all applicable BSA requirements. This includes establishing internal controls22 to monitor compliance with currency transaction reporting requirements with regard to known customers. Neither 31 C.F.R. § 103.22(b)(2) nor (c)(3) states specifically that a casino or a card club must create a record of transactions that are less than $10,000, a casino or card club would need an effective internal control for customers (known or unknown).23 Therefore, to be able to identify large chip redemptions at a reasonable threshold under $10,000 that were paid with currency that may have been structured to avoid reporting requirements or otherwise to obscure large cash out transactions, a casino or card club must have an internal control for customer chip redemptions at a cage. A casino or card club must aggregate customer currency transactions that occur on the floor or the cage, when it has obtained knowledge of such transactions either from examining records or actual knowledge (including of large chip redemptions for currency).24 For similar reasons, a casino would need a method for identifying large redemptions at a reasonable threshold under $10,000 of a betting ticket, token, or "TITO" ticket25 that were paid with currency to a known customer.26
Question 6: To what extent is a casino required to aggregate credit card advances with other types of cash out transactions for currency transaction reporting purposes?
 
Answer 6: A casino is required to file a CTRC on currency transactions by or on behalf of any customer that, alone or when aggregated, exceed $10,000 in a gaming day. A casino must aggregate and report multiple currency transactions when it has knowledge that such transactions have occurred. Therefore, when a customer uses a credit card at an automated teller machine ("ATM") or other cash access devices located in a casino or on casino property,27 and then goes to a cage cashier to receive currency for this advance on credit, such transactions would be subject to currency transaction reporting, and they would need to be aggregated with other cash out transactions in which a casino has obtained knowledge to determine whether they exceeded $10,000 to a customer in a gaming day.
Question 7: Is a casino or card club chip runner, casino floor person, or a casino host required to be listed as an agent on a CTRC when they conduct currency transactions on behalf of customers?
 
Answer 7: No. When cashing out chips in excess of $10,000 in a gaming day for a customer who is actively gambling, a chip runner28 or a floor person,29 is acting within the scope of employment and is an agent of the card club or casino; they are not agents of a customer with respect to such transactions. Accordingly, the chip runner or floor person would not be listed as an agent of a customer on a CTRC. Similarly, a casino host,30 acting within the scope of employment, is an agent of a casino, when conducting any currency transactions in excess of $10,000 in a gaming day for a customer and would not be listed as an agent of a customer on a CTRC. If these casino or card club employees handle currency transactions in excess of $10,000 for a customer, they would be required to obtain identification information from that customer for completion of a CTRC.
Question 8: When a customer refuses to provide a Social Security Number for completing a CTRC, can a casino or card club write "Refused" in Item 7 of the CTRC?
 
Answer 8: No. When a casino or card club has obtained actual knowledge of a reportable currency transaction, it must obtain the identification information (such as customer name, permanent address, and Social Security Number ("SSN")) needed to file a complete and accurate CTRC, and then verify the name and address "before concluding the transaction." If the customer's state driver's license does not contain a Social Security Number and the customer does not provide a paper Social Security Number card issued by the Social Security Administration, a casino or card club can enter a verbally provided SSN on a CTRC. Also, FinCEN understands that a casino may have the customer complete an IRS Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification,31 to obtain a person's correct Taxpayer Identification Number32 or, if the customer has a deposit or credit account with the casino, the casino will review the account to obtain the SSN since the SSN is required at the time that the account is opened.33 In all cases, a casino or a card club must file a CTRC for reportable transactions with all of the required identifying information that it has obtained from a customer, government records it maintains and/or other verified internal records.34
Question 9: Are two separately licensed, but jointly-owned riverboat casinos that are operating from the same dock and sharing certain information systems, required to aggregate currency transactions by the same customer that occurred at both casinos?
 
Answer 9: No. Each casino licensee is a separate financial institution for purposes of complying with currency transaction reporting. Two riverboat casinos that are under common ownership and common management, share certain information systems, maintain similar accounting and internal control procedures, or use the same docking facilities, but which have separate licenses, are not required under 31 C.F.R. § 103.22(b)(2) and (c)(3) to aggregate and report customer currency transactions that occurred at both facilities.35 Nonetheless, for two riverboat casinos with automated data processing systems that are closely integrated, automated programs for compliance with the BSA must provide for the use of these systems to aid in assuring compliance with identifying transactions that appear to be suspicious and that are conducted between the two casinos by known customers36 (e.g., to evade the $10,000 reporting requirement through structuring).37
Question 10: Is a casino required to file a CTRC on customer jackpot wins from casino games other than slot jackpot or video lottery terminal wins?
 
Answer 10: Yes. A casino is required to file a CTRC on customer jackpot wins paid in currency from casino games other than slot jackpot or video lottery terminal wins.38 These include among other games, bingo (traditional),39 Caribbean stud poker, keno, or let it ride poker.40 These transactions may need to be aggregated with other cash out transactions.
Section C: 31 C.F.R. § 103.21 Suspicious Transaction Reporting Requirements
 
Question 11: May a casino share information with another casino concerning potential suspicious activity?
 
Answer 11: Yes, casinos may utilize Section 314(b)41 information sharing to work together to identify money laundering and terrorist financing. Also, casinos can utilize Section 314(b) information sharing with depository institutions and money services businesses. Section 314(b) as implemented by 31 C.F.R. § 103.110, establishes a safe harbor from liability for a financial institution or association of financial institutions that voluntarily chooses to share information with other financial institutions for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting money laundering or terrorist activity (if required notification, verification and information security is in place). Section 314(b) permits sharing information relating to transactions that a financial institution suspects may involve the proceeds of one or more specified unlawful activities listed in 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956 and 1957, which include an array of fraudulent and other criminal activities.42 The safe harbor afforded by Section 314(b) is only available to financial institutions that are required to implement an anti-money laundering program, which includes, for example, depository institutions regulated by a federal functional regulator,43 casinos, and money services businesses.44
Section 314(b) does not replace the existing obligations of financial institutions to file suspicious activity reports when required. Please note that the Section 314(b) process cannot be used by a casino to exchange information with another casino about customers conducting non-criminal financial activities, such as card counting. Also, please note that the process cannot be used to share a copy of a filed FinCEN Form 102, Suspicious Activity Report by Casinos and Card Clubs ("SARC") or the fact that it was filed, with another financial institution.45 However, the underlying information in the SAR may be disclosed as long as the existence/fact that a SAR has been filed is not revealed. For additional information on the Section 314(b) voluntary information sharing program, or to submit a notice to FinCEN to share information voluntarily, refer to www.fincen.gov.
Question 12: Is a casino or card club required to file a SARC, or FinCEN Form 109, Suspicious Activity Report by Money Service Business (SAR-MSB), for suspicious money transfers or wire transfers that it receives or sends?
 
Answer 12: A casino or a card club's requirement to report suspicious activities applies to all types of financial services conducted or attempted by, at, or through a casino or card club. When a casino or card club sells or redeems money transfers or wire transfers within its cage facility, conducted pursuant to a contractual or other arrangement with a money transfer issuer or a bank, it would be required to file a SARC, when it knows, suspects or has a reason to suspect that the transaction or pattern of transactions is both suspicious and involves $5,000 or more. However, if the casino or card club enters into a contractual agreement to lease space within the establishment to a money transfer company and the company's agent(s) operate the business, then the money services business suspicious activity reporting rules would apply and the money transfer company would use FinCEN Form 109 to report suspicious activity.46
Question 13: To what extent should casinos and card clubs use the "other" box in Item 26 on the SARC to describe the type of suspicious activity?
 
Answer 13: Item 26 on the SARC contains a list of 16 specific types of suspicious activity. Because suspicious transactions may comprise more than one of the listed types of activities, casinos and card clubs should check as many boxes as are applicable (but be sure to check at least one box). FinCEN encourages casinos and card clubs to refrain from checking box "q" for "Other" on the form unless the activity is not covered by the existing list of suspicious activities.47 Please note that casinos and card clubs must complete Part VI, the narrative portion of the form,48 regardless of whether the "Other" box is checked. FinCEN understands that some casinos and card clubs may have mistakenly interpreted box "q", "Other (Describe in Part VI)" to mean that to complete the SARC's "Narrative," you must check this box, since it asks a filer to describe the suspicious activity in Part VI. This is incorrect.
Filing forms without checking the appropriate type(s) of suspicious activity or failing to check appropriate boxes describing the types of suspicious activity diminishes their utility to law enforcement and limits FinCEN's ability to sort these particular forms for review and analysis to look for patterns of suspicious activities.
Question 14: What type of records is a casino or card club required to retain to support a SARC that it has filed?
 
Answer 14: A casino or card club must maintain supporting documentation or business record equivalents49 with a copy of the filed suspicious activity report for five years from the date of filing the report. Typically, such documentation may include canceled checks, confessions, credit bureau reports, credit slips/vouchers, deposit/withdrawal slips, multiple transaction logs, player rating and slot club account records,50 identification credentials, spreadsheets, photographs, surveillance audio and/or video recording media, and surveillance logs.51 For casinos that have hotels, and in the absence of any information other than a customer's name, other supporting documentation may include credit/debit cards, guest folios, and safety deposit box registrations.
Question 15: Once a casino or card club files a SARC, what are its ongoing filing requirements when customers continue to frequent the casino or card club and/or conduct additional suspicious activity?
 
Answer 15: After a casino or card club files a SARC it should report continuing suspicious activity with a report being filed at least every 90 days.52 This notifies law enforcement of the continuing nature of the activity, and serves as a reminder to the organization that it must continue to review the suspicious activity to determine if other actions may be appropriate.53 This should continue even if a law enforcement agency has declined to investigate or there is knowledge that an investigation has begun, since the information contained in a SARC may be of interest to other law enforcement agencies as well as gaming regulatory agencies.
Question 16: What does the SAR non-disclosure provision mean to a casino or card club that has filed a SARC?
 
Answer 16: No financial institution, or director, officer, employee, or agent of any financial institution, who reports a suspicious transaction, may notify any person involved in the transaction that the transaction has been reported, including any person identified in the suspicious activity report. Moreover, a filed SARC, as well as information that would reveal the existence of a SARC (including any document, memorandum, record, log, or work papers that references a SARC) must be treated as confidential.54 Therefore, any person subpoenaed or otherwise requested to disclose a SARC or the information that would reveal the existence of a SARC to a source that is not an appropriate law enforcement or regulatory agency, or FinCEN, shall decline to produce the SARC or to provide any information that would reveal the existence of a SARC.55 If a casino or card club does receive a request for SARC information (except for those from an appropriate law enforcement or regulatory agency), it must decline the request and notify FinCEN's Office of Chief Counsel at (703) 905-3590.
Question 17: Can a domestic casino parent or headquarters corporation and its domestic casino affiliates, branches, or places of business consult with each other before filing a SARC?
 
Answer 17: Yes. Under the SAR non-disclosure provisions, there is nothing prohibiting a domestic casino parent or headquarters corporation and its domestic casino affiliates, branches, or places of business from consulting with each other before a SAR form is filed concerning customer accountholder activity that is occurring at more than one of its casinos as part of their parent-affiliate relationship. Also, this would include discussion or sharing any underlying information about a customer and transaction(s) before a SARC is filed.56 However, a domestic parent or headquarters corporation and its domestic casino affiliates, branches, or places of business cannot disclose to each other that a SAR form will be filed. Moreover, after filing, further disclosure of the fact that a SAR was filed is prohibited except as permitted under 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g)(2) and 31 C.F.R. § 103.21(e).
Question 18: What type of information may a casino or card club disclose in response to a subpoena, summons, or other process issued in civil litigation that involved suspicious activity contained on a filed SARC?
 
Answer 18: The BSA does not prohibit the disclosure of internal casino or card club records upon which a SARC is based in response to a subpoena, summons, or other process issued in civil litigation, with all the relevant information pertaining to a customer's gambling activity that occurred at a casino or card club. For example, the prohibition against disclosing a SARC (or information that would reveal the existence of a SARC) would not preclude a casino or card club from disclosing,57 internal records such as check cashing account, credit account, deposit account, player rating account, slot club account, customer win/loss statements, monetary instrument logs, multiple transaction logs, audio or video tapes, CD-ROM discs, DVD discs, etc., to a private litigant. Similarly, the prohibition against disclosing SARCs would not prevent the disclosure of BSA records of transmittal of funds or negotiable instruments at or in excess of $3,000 Therefore, whatever information is appropriate and already contained in internal casino or card club records or on other discoverable government records and forms mentioned above can be disclosed in response to a subpoena, summons, or other process issued in civil litigation, except for a SARC form itself or the information that would reveal the existence of the SARC (including any document, memorandum, record, log, or work papers that references a SARC). For assistance with specific requests, please contact FinCEN's Office of Chief Counsel at (703) 905-3590.
Question 19: Since a casino is not required to file a CTRC on slot jackpot or video lottery wins, is it required to file a SARC on slot jackpot or video lottery terminal wins that are suspicious?
 
Answer 19: Yes. If a casino knows, suspects or has reason to suspect that the transaction or pattern of transactions is both suspicious and involves $5,000 or more (including slot jackpot or video lottery terminals winnings) it must report it as suspicious activity. This is applicable to suspicious activity involving a jackpot win from bingo, Caribbean stud poker, keno, or let it ride poker. The filing requirements pertaining to: (i) IRS Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings; (ii) IRS Form 1042-S, Foreign Person's U.S. Source Income Subject to Withholding; or (iii) IRS Forms 1099-Misc, Miscellaneous Income (e.g., pertaining to prizes or awards) are particularly relevant here. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.21(a)(2)(i), which states, among other things, that a transaction requires reporting as suspicious if it is ". . . to avoid any transaction reporting requirement under federal law or regulation." For example, a casino may attempt to complete an IRS Form W-2G or an IRS Form 1042-S for a customer's slot jackpot or video lottery terminal win of $5,000 or more and a customer may: (i) fail to provide customer identification; (ii) furnish a legitimate type of identification document that a casino believes is false or altered (e.g., address changed, photograph substituted); (iii) furnish a legitimate type of identification document in which the description of the individual does not match the customer's appearance (e.g., different age, height, eye color, gender); (iv) present conflicting identification information (e.g., different address or different spelling or numeration in address; different state driver's license number, or different Social Security Number).
Section D: 31 C.F.R. § 103.36 Casino Recordkeeping Requirements
 
Question 20: When recordkeeping requirements are similar, except for the dollar thresholds, for casinos as well as all financial institutions, which requirements apply to a casino or card club?
 
Answer 20: Our rules at 31 C.F.R. § 103.33 list certain records that must be made and retained by all financial institutions including casinos and card clubs. Rules implementing the BSA also include certain recordkeeping requirements specifically for casinos or card clubs. These are set forth in 31 C.F.R. § 103.36. Where the dollar threshold differs between the two provisions, a casino or card club must keep records based on the lower threshold. For example, 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(4) requires casinos and card clubs to retain a record of each extension of credit in excess of $2,500, including a customer's identification and the verification of that identification, despite the fact that the requirement regarding extensions of credit in 31 C.F.R. § 103.33(a) is tied to a threshold of more than $10,000. Also, although the requirements in 31 C.F.R. § 103.33(f) apply to non-bank financial institutions for transmittals of funds in the amount of $3,000 or more, please note that pursuant to 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(5) casinos and card clubs must retain records for international wire transfers at any monetary value. Therefore, when a casino or card club complies with 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(5),58 it has satisfied the requirement for 31 C.F.R. § 103.33(f).
Question 21: If a casino scans or microfilms its player rating records, is it required also to keep the paper copy of the record?
 
Answer 21: No. The BSA requires the retention of the source records (either the originals or microfilm version, or other copies or reproductions of the documents) of all records required to be retained by 31 C.F.R. Part 103. This would include, among other customer records, records prepared or used to monitor a customer's gaming activity (e.g., player rating records, multiple transaction logs). As a reminder, scanned or microfilmed player rating records must be retained for 5 years and filed or stored in such a way as to be accessible within a reasonable period of time.
Question 22: Does a casino or card club have to record a customer's permanent address for BSA recordkeeping requirements or is a P.O. Box number acceptable when it appears on a customer's state driver's license or identification card?
 
Answer 22: To comply with 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.33(f), 103.36(a), 103.36(b)(1), 103.36(b)(4), 103.36(b)(5), and 103.36(b)(9), casinos and card clubs are required to use due diligence measures to obtain a customer's permanent address.59 This means casinos and card clubs are required to obtain and record a customer's permanent address (i.e., permanent street address, city, state name or two-letter state abbreviation used by the U.S. Postal Service, and ZIP code, including any apartment number or suite number and road or road number associated with a permanent address) to comply with these recordkeeping requirements. If a customer is from a foreign country, the state/territory name (or state/territory code) (i.e., Canada and Mexico) and the appropriate country name (or two-letter country code) should be obtained. A casino or card club is required to use all reasonably available information or reasonable alternatives to obtain the needed information to be in compliance with the BSA and should not enter a P.O. Box number unless the customer has no street address. If a customer's state driver's license or identification card contains a P.O. Box number, casinos and card clubs would need to ask a customer for his/her permanent street address. If a customer states he/she has a permanent address, but refuses to provide it, and a casino and card club conducts the transaction, they would not be in compliance with these BSA recordkeeping requirements.60 However, if a casino or card club uses due diligence to obtain a customer's permanent address61 and determines that a customer does not have a permanent address, then a casino can record a customer's P.O. Box number without concern of non-compliance with the above BSA recordkeeping requirements. Nonetheless, in the case when a reportable currency transaction occurs, a casino and card club must file a CTRC involving a cash in and/or cash out.
Section E: 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(a) Compliance Program Requirements
 
Question 23: Must a casino's anti-money laundering compliance officer limit his duties to BSA compliance matters?
 
Answer 23: No. Although the BSA requires financial institutions, including casinos or card clubs, to designate an individual or individuals (e.g., a compliance officer and/or compliance committee) as responsible for ensuring that institution's day-to-day compliance with the BSA, the anti-money laundering program requirement permits flexibility by allowing each compliance program to address the characteristics of a particular casino or card club. Each casino and card club should conduct a risk-based analysis of its business (e.g., type of products and services it offers, the locations it serves, and the nature of its customers) to determine, among other things, whether it needs a full-time BSA compliance officer.
Question 24: How can a casino's compliance committee help to assure that a casino complies with the BSA?
 
Answer 24: Casinos and card clubs are not required under the BSA to establish compliance committees in all instances. Nonetheless, there may be instances in which the risk confronting a casino or a card club would require establishing a BSA compliance committee. FinCEN understands that casinos establish BSA compliance committees as an executive level safeguard to ensure that a casino complies with all applicable laws, regulations, and guidance in a reasonable manner.62
Section F: Other Casino Issues
 
Question 25: What are the civil penalties for non-compliance with BSA recordkeeping and reporting requirements?
 
Answer 25: FinCEN may seek civil money penalties of $25,000 a day per violation of any anti-money laundering compliance program requirement. Also, FinCEN may seek: (i) injunctive relief from a court against future violations of the BSA; (ii) civil money penalties of up to $25,000 or more per reporting violation (not to exceed $100,000); and (iii) other appropriate relief. In addition, FinCEN may seek civil money penalties (up to the amount of transaction) for structuring, attempting to structure, or assisting in structuring transactions. These civil sanctions are for willful violations63 and may be applied to any casino or card club that is subject to the BSA, or to any partner, director, officer, or employee of such gaming operations.

Questions or comments regarding the contents of this Guidance should be addressed to the FinCEN Regulatory Helpline at 800-949-2732.
1 See 31 C.F.R. Part 103.
2 See Nevada Revised Statute § 463.018 and Nevada Gaming Commission Regulation 1.170.
3 Nevada gaming statutes define a "nonrestricted license" to include "a license for, or the operation of, a slot machine route." See Nevada Revised Statute § 463.0177(3). A Nevada "nonrestricted license" or "nonrestricted operation" also includes, among other things: (i) ". . . license for, or an operation consisting of, 16 or more slot machines;" or (ii) ". . . license for, or operation of, any number of slot machines together with any other game, gaming device, race book or sports pool at one gaming establishment." See Nevada Revised Statute § 463.0177(1) - (2).
4 Only one "casino" will operate at a given establishment. The party that holds a "nonrestrictive license" and operates the slot machines pursuant to a participation agreement would be the operator of a casino. See Nevada Revised Statute § 463.245 ("A gaming license may not be issued to any person if the issuance would result in more than one licensed operation at a single establishment, whether or not the profits or revenue from gaming are shared between the licensed operations").
5 Each business establishment with gross annual gaming revenues exceeding $1 million would contain a separate "casino" for purposes of our rules. Nevada licenses gaming activity separately at each location. See Nevada Gaming Commission Regulation 3.010 ("[The Nevada Gaming Commission] may deny an application for a state gaming license if the Commission deems that the place or location for which the license is sought is unsuitable for the conduct of gaming operations"). If a Nevada slot route operator is not operating a casino for purposes of our rules, but qualifies as a check casher, or currency dealer or exchanger, as those terms are defined in 31 C.F.R. § 103.11(uu)), it may be considered a money services business ("MSB") and subject to BSA requirements applicable to MSBs.
6 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.30(a)(1).
7 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.30 and Section 6050I of Title 26 of the United State Code. The negotiable instruments are treated as currency if they are received in a "designated reporting transaction" or used in an attempt to avoid the Form 8300 requirement. Designated reporting transactions include the retail sale of consumer durables, collectibles, or travel or entertainment activities. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.30(c).
8 However, if these other gambling establishments or nongaming related business satisfy the definition of a money services business ("MSB") in rules implementing the BSA (such as a check casher, or currency dealer or exchanger, as those terms are defined in 31 C.F.R. § 103.11(uu)), then they would be subject to FinCEN Form 104, Currency Transaction Report ("CTR") and other requirements applicable to MSBs.
9 For treatment of bingo, see FinCEN's Frequently Asked Questions - Casino Recordkeeping, Reporting and Compliance Program Requirements (FIN-2007-G005, November 14, 2007), Question and Answer 2; for treatment of off-track betting, Question and Answer 5; for treatment of greyhound tracks, Question and Answer 6; and for treatment of horse race tracks, Question and Answer 7. Also, please note that these gambling establishments maybe subject to FinCEN Form 105, Report of International Transportation of Currency and Monetary Instruments ("CMIR") as well as Treasury Form TD F 90-22.1, Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts. See 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.23 and 103.24, respectively.
10 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.30(d)(iii).
11 See 31 U.S.C. 5324. Structuring would include attempts to cause Form 8300 not to be filed, or to file a false or incomplete form. The filer can check item 1b on the Form 8300 to report the structuring. In addition, it can be checked if there is an indication of possible illegal activity with the transaction.
12 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(b)(4).
13 A buy-in is the amount of funds a player uses to purchase casino chips when commencing play. A buy-in can occur in cash, credit or as a deposit withdrawal.
14 "California Games" are games in which one player acts as the bank for the game and the other players bet against the bank. The banker collects all winning bets and pays all losing bets from his/her bankroll. Games may include California Blackjack, Pai Gow Poker, Pai Gow Tiles, and Super Pan.
15 The BSA defines knowledge for this purpose. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.22(c)(3).
16 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64.
17 See 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.28 and 103.64(a)(2)(i), (a)(2)(iii), and (a)(2)(v)(A).
18 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.38(d).
19 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(11).
20 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.38(b) which states that "If no record is made in the ordinary course of business of any transaction with respect to which records are required to be retained by this subpart, then such a record shall be prepared in writing by the financial institution." Therefore, a card club employee monitoring a non-house banked card game, who has obtained actual knowledge of a reportable currency transaction, would be required to produce a record of the transaction for purposes of currency transaction reporting.
21 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(8).
22 Independently, other Federal, state and tribal gaming commissions have established requirements for each duly licensed or authorized casino to establish minimum requirements for internal controls (i.e., procedures) over gaming operations for complying with regulatory requirements (i.e., Minimum Internal Control Standards - "MICS").
23 A known customer would include one who has a check cashing, credit or deposit account, or whose identity (i.e., name, date of birth, address, and government identification number) has been previously verified on a filed CTRC or any federal tax form containing customer information. Also, an effective BSA internal control will include, in many instances, the creation and retention of records, including those not otherwise produced in the ordinary course of business. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(a)(2)(i) and 103.38(b).
24 As illustrative examples, when: (i) customers provide to cage cashiers their identification credentials and/or casino account numbers for such large redemptions for currency (i e., just before, during or immediately after); or (ii) cashiers know who such customers are (i.e., known customers) even in the absence of identification credentials or given account numbers for such redemptions.
25 For a further explanation of Ticket in/Ticket Out ("TITO"), see FIN-2007-G005, Nov. 14, 2007, Question and Answer 16, footnote 57.
26 FinCEN has addressed identifying betting ticket, chip, token, or TITO ticket redemptions for currency at a cage conducted by "unknown" customers in regards to suspicious activity reporting in Question and Answer 16 of FIN-2007-G005 (Nov. 14, 2007). As discussed in Question and Answer 16, a casino must implement procedures reasonably designed to assure the detection and proper reporting of suspicious transactions. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(a)(2)(v)(B).
27 Customers can obtain cash directly from an ATM located within a casino typically up to $500 per day per customer, depending on limits set by their depository institutions. For amounts above that general threshold, an ATM machine prints out vouchers that customers may take to a cage for payment, insert into a slot machine to play, or take to a kiosk machine for dispensing currency. In the event that the advance is dispensed at a kiosk machine, a casino may have knowledge of a customer's transaction based on: (i) its contractual agreement with a financial service provider for the kiosk and (ii) its system of internal controls which typically requires that such a transaction of $1,000 or more be linked to a customer.
28 A chip runner is a card club or card room employee or a casino poker room employee who works on the gaming floor selling or redeeming gaming chips and/or conducting transactions at the cage on behalf of customers who are actively gambling.
29 A floor person is a management employee who supervises the operation of a gaming table within a pit and also prepares a player rating card on each rated customer. Also know as a casino "rater."
30 A casino host is a marketing executive of a casino who is responsible for catering to high-end customers' needs. Duties include assisting in the opening of deposit and credit accounts for customers, and issuing complimentary gifts and services to customers to induce their continued patronage.
31 IRS Form W-9 requires the customer to certify, under penalties of perjury, that the number shown on the form is the correct Taxpayer Identification Number, and he/she is a U.S. person (including a U.S. resident alien), when the customer signs and dates the form.
32 Please note that the Internal Revenue Service issues an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number ("ITIN") to be used as a tax processing number for individuals who do not qualify to obtain Social Security Numbers ("SSNs"). Since an ITIN is not acceptable as a primary means of identification for purposes of completing Items 14 and 28 on the CTRC, FinCEN will discuss it in the next set of casino frequently asked questions.
33 In these situations, if a customer refuses to provide a SSN on a Form W-9 for filing a CTRC or completing a Federal income tax form, FinCEN understands that many state and tribal regulators support the standard industry practice of providing a receipt and retaining a customer's chips, tokens and/or tickets until a SSN is provided at which time a CTRC will be completed. FinCEN understands that casinos' experiences have shown that customers will return with their identification credentials to complete the cashing out of large chip, ticket, and/or token transactions which are then followed by the filings of CTRCs. Also, if a casino or card club knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that a suspicious transaction was conducted or attempted by, at, or through a casino or card club, and involve $5,000 or more a FinCEN Form 102 is applicable. Information that could point to the need for a SARC may include a customer providing a false SSN in the past, refusing to provide a SSN or not providing it within the filing period for the CTRC.
34 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(a)(2)(v)(A).
35 A somewhat similar analysis would apply to land-based tribal casinos authorized pursuant to the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. See 25 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. Therefore, a tribal government may own more than one tribal casino in the same state, but each casino that is separately licensed by the tribal government or the tribal gaming commission would be considered a separately authorized gaming establishment for purposes of currency transaction reporting, even when the casinos have the same Taxpayer Identification Number for purposes of Title 26.
36 See Question and Answer 5, Footnote 22, for a discussion of known customers.
37 See 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.21(a)(2)(ii), 103.63, and 103.64(a)(2)(vi). FinCEN recognizes that even for two casinos with automated data processing systems and programs that are closely integrated, that for an unknown customer that lacks a casino deposit (i.e., safekeeping, front money or wagering), credit, check cashing, player rating/player tracking, or slot club account, that as a practical matter, it would difficult to monitor such a customer for suspicious activity reporting without associating information from casino surveillance and multiple transaction logs on currency transactions that are less than CTRC reporting threshold at both casinos.
38 A casino is not required to file a CTRC on slot jackpot or video lottery terminal wins in excess of $10,000 in currency. See FIN-2007-G005, Nov. 14, 2007, Question and Answer 12.
39 Traditional bingo is played with cards or paper having a grid of numbered squares corresponding to numbered balls drawn at random; it is not played with any computerized electronic aids.
40 For treatment of poker under the BSA, see FIN-2007-G005, November 14, 2007, Question and Answer 2.
41 See 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-56) which states in part that: " [u]pon notice provided to the Secretary, 2 or more financial institutions and any association of financial institutions may share information with one another regarding individuals, entities, organizations, and countries suspected of possible terrorist or money laundering activities."
42 See FIN-2009-G002, Guidance on the Scope of Permissible Information Sharing Covered by Section 314(b) Safe Harbor of the USA PATRIOT Act (June 16, 2009).
43 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.120.
44 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.125.
45 See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g)(2) and 31 C.F.R. § 103.21(e).
46 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.20
47 For example, annually over the last six years approximately 25 to 35 percent of forms filed had only the "Other" box checked or no specific activity checked at all, instead of checking the appropriate type(s) of suspicious activities. Casinos and card clubs should avoid checking "Other" to complete the SARC's Narrative unless the type of suspicious activity that occurred is not listed in Item 26 (see FinCEN Form 102, Instructions, Item 26).
48 For guidance on how to prepare a clear and concise narrative, see FIN-2007-G005, Nov. 14, 2007, Question and Answer 2.
49 See FinCEN Guidance FIN-2007-G003, Suspicious Activity Report Supporting Documentation, issued on June 13, 2007.
50 Player rating records, which we addressed in 54 F.R. 1165 - 1167 (Jan. 12, 1989), reflect all cash activity recorded on them (regardless of the amount) that have occurred on the gaming floor. Player rating and slot club accounts track gaming activity and serve as a marketing tool to: (i) identify frequent customers as well as higher dollar players, (ii) encourage continued patronage, and (iii) ensure that complementaries are awarded on a cost-effective basis. Casinos utilize internal controls to help to ensure accountability for customers using player rating and slot club account cards. A customer's computerized player rating or slot club account record typically contains a customer's name, permanent address, date of birth, sometimes other identification information (e.g., Social Security Number for purposes of Internal Revenue Code income tax reporting for jackpot wins) as well as a player's gambling activity.
51 See FinCEN Form 102 (Instructions, page 2).
52 See The SAR Activity Review - Trends, Tips & Issues, Issue 10 (May 2006), Section 4, pages 35 - 36, The SAR Activity Review - Trends, Tips & Issue, Issue 2 (June 2001), Section 6, page 35 and The SAR Activity Review - Trends, Tips & Issues, Issue 2 (October 2000), Section 5, page 27.
53 These may include, for example, when required by state, tribal or local gaming regulation, subsequently barring or banning a customer from future gambling and accountholder activity. See SARC, Item 22.
54 See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g)(2) and 31 C.F.R. § 103.21(e). FinCEN proposed amendments to 31 C.F.R. § 103.21 to expand and clarify the confidentiality that should be afforded SARCs and information that would reveal the existence of a SARC. See 74 F.R. 10148, 10157 - 10158 (Mar. 9, 2009). Readers of this guidance should consult that rule, when finalized, for more specific information regarding the appropriate parties to whom a SARC may be provided.
55 For examples of appropriate law enforcement and regulatory agencies see The SAR Activity Review, Trends Tips & Issues, Issue 9, October 2005 (pages 43 - 45).
56 Also, there is nothing to prohibit a domestic casino parent or headquarters corporation and/or its domestic casino affiliates, branches, or places of business from consulting with affiliated casinos licensed in other countries before a SAR form is filed concerning customer accountholder activity that is occurring among them.
57 This FAQ does not address the applicability of any other Federal, state, local, or tribal laws or regulations.
58 Please note that there is no monetary threshold in 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(5).
59 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.64(a)(2)(v)(A), which requires the implementation of procedures for using all available information to determine, when required by the BSA, a customer's name, address, Social Security Number, and other identifying information and verification of the same. Therefore, since a casino records information on extensions of credit, for example, it must ensure that the records are complete pursuant to 31 C.F.R. § 103.36(b)(4).
60 Also, such activity by a customer could be suspicious since it is designed to evade the BSA reporting requirement. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.21(a)(2)(ii).
61 FinCEN understands that some casinos use the following available information or alternatives to obtain the needed information such as: (i) Federal tax forms filed for certain customers' gambling transactions; (ii) other customer documents such as copies of negotiable instruments (e.g., personal checks); (iii) a reporting agency that provides telephonic or on-line searching of customer identification information for those that applied for casino credit as well as have outstanding casino debts; (iv) public on-line database search engines that do not require a subscription; (v) organizations that provide subscription services to businesses and governmental agencies containing individuals' personal identification information from their commercial databases, or (vi) during subsequent trips when knowledge is obtained about customers' presence through the process of conducting new casino transactions.
62 A BSA compliance committee may be composed of all applicable casino departments such as accounting, cage operations, casino credit, finance, information technology, internal audit, marketing, slot operations, surveillance, and table games. A casino's BSA compliance officer is usually a member of such a committee. In-house and/or external legal counsel may provide advice to a BSA compliance committee, but is not necessarily a member. A BSA compliance committee may need to schedule regular meetings to establish and monitor a risk-based approach to its business (e.g., type of products and services it offers, the locations it serves, and the nature of its customers).
63 See 31 U.S.C. §§ 5320 - 5322, and 5324;and 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.57(c), (e), and (f), and103.63.

Financial Institution

Casinos




Content
Content
Content
Content



20130923.pdf243.62 KB


Contact
Contact: Steve Hudak (703) 905-3770


Immediate Release
September 23, 2013




WASHINGTON, DC – The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today announced the assessment of a $37.5 million civil money penalty against TD Bank, N.A. for failure to file suspicious activity reports related to the massive Ponzi scheme orchestrated by Florida attorney Scott Rothstein. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency also announced the assessment of a concurrent $37.5 million penalty against the Bank for related violations. Additionally, the Securities and Exchange Commission has assessed a separate $15 million penalty against the Bank for related securities violations.From April 2008 through September 2009, the Bank willfully violated the Bank Secrecy Act’s reporting requirements by failing to detect and adequately report suspicious activities in a timely manner. During that period, Rothstein orchestrated a major Ponzi scheme by fraudently inducing victims to invest in purported settlements involving whistleblower and sexual harassment lawsuits. Thousands of transactions flowed through his multiple law firm accounts at TD Bank which included transactions related to Rothstein’s Ponzi scheme. While the Rothstein law firm’s accounts alerted in TD Bank’s anti-money laundering surveillance software for suspicious activity, TD Bank employees failed to recognize the suspicious activity and file SARs in a timely manner. On January 27, 2010, Rothstein pleaded guilty to a racketeering conspiracy in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida and is currently serving a 50-year prison sentence.In 2011, the Bank conducted a review of the Rothstein transactions. Based on the results of the review it filed five late suspicious activity reports, totaling an estimated $900 million in aggregate suspicious transaction activity occurring between April 2008 and October 2009. A lack of adequate training for both the anti-money laundering and business staff contributed to the failure to recognize this suspicious activity.“In the face of repeated alerts on Mr. Rothstein’s accounts by the Bank’s anti-money laundering surveillance software over an 18 month period, the Bank did not do enough to prevent the pain and financial suffering of innocent investors,” FinCEN Director Jennifer Shasky Calvery stated. “Financial institutions must do a better job of protecting our financial system and citizens from such harm. It is not acceptable to have a poorly resourced and trained staff overseeing such a critical function.”
FinCEN's mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.



Content



20140130.pdf197.16 KB

SECURITIES INDUSTRY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS ASSOCIATION ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES CONFERENCE
January 30, 2014



Good morning. I am honored to be joining you again this year. I recently had the opportunity to meet in Washington with SIFMA’s AML and Financial Crimes Committee and we had a very productive discussion. I know that some of the threats that are on your industry’s radar screen – threats such as securities fraud, market manipulation, and computer intrusion, are many of the same threats we are focusing on at FinCEN. It was helpful to hear your colleagues’ perspectives on these threats, and it is encouraging to know we are working towards many of the same goals in this area.
I also know from speaking with the SIFMA committee that you are interested in hearing my perspectives in the enforcement area, and this is where I would like to begin my remarks today.
Enforcement
As Director, I feel it is important that financial institutions take responsibility when their actions violate the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). And by accepting responsibility, it is not just about admitting to the facts alleged in FinCEN’s assessment. It is also about acknowledging a violation of the law.
When a culture of compliance is lacking, the result is ineffective AML safeguards. A number of our recent enforcement actions have led us to begin thinking more broadly about how the culture of compliance impacts financial institutions, often with devastating consequences. So I would like to expand for a moment on the importance of a strong culture of compliance within a financial institution.
For the culture of compliance to be strong within an institution, the business side of the organization needs to take AML controls seriously. And it needs to begin with the institution’s leadership.
A financial institution’s leadership – to include the board of directors, executive management, and owners and operators – is responsible for performance in all areas of the institution, including compliance with the BSA. The commitment of an organization’s leaders should be clearly visible, as the degree of that commitment will have a direct influence on the attitudes of others within the organization.
Business interests should never compromise an institution’s AML program. I know many of you here today are responsible for compliance within your organization. The fact that you are here at this conference is evidence of your commitment in this area. And as compliance professionals, you should be empowered with sufficient authority, independence, and the tools you need to effectively implement the AML program within your institution.
I know there have been calls for more accountability on the business side of an organization when AML compliance fails. This is where a focus on individuals, as well as institutions, might come into play.
The BSA does provide FinCEN with broad authority to obtain injunctions against institutions, as well as individuals, it believes are involved in violations of the BSA. It also allows FinCEN to impose civil penalties not only against domestic financial institutions, but also against partners, directors, officers and employees of such entities who themselves participate in misconduct.
Enforcement should never be a “gotcha” or hide-the-ball exercise. And I think if you look at our past enforcement actions, and review the facts, you can clearly see why FinCEN took action in these cases.
We know that the vast majority of the industry, and in particular the compliance officers within financial institutions, are doing everything they can to comply with their responsibilities. We appreciate all you are doing to keep your financial institutions safe from illicit use. However, we will employ all of the tools at our disposal and hold accountable those institutions and individuals who recklessly allow our financial institutions to be vulnerable to terrorist financing, money laundering, proliferation finance, and other illicit financial activity.
Information Sharing
I would like to speak for a moment of the importance of information sharing, as this also ties into a strong culture of compliance.
There is information in various departments within a financial institution that should be shared with the compliance staff, such as information developed by the department responsible for preventing fraud. A failure to share information due to systemic stove-piping, or other reasons, can significantly weaken the effectiveness of an institution’s AML program.
Information sharing within an organization is critically important, but sharing information between financial institutions is also critical. The 314(b) safe harbor provisions permit financial institutions to share information under the 314(b) program as it relates to transactions involving proceeds of suspected fraud and other specified unlawful activities (SUAs), the predicate offenses for money laundering, if the financial institution suspects there is a nexus between the suspected fraud or other SUA and possible money laundering or terrorist financing activity. And I can tell you as a former money laundering prosecutor who has handled several fraud related money laundering cases, anytime you have funds that you suspect are related to fraud in or moving through your financial institution, you should also be suspicious that transactions made with those funds may involve money laundering.
We heard that there was some confusion about how to participate in the 314(b) program, and who was able to take advantage of the safe harbor. As a result of this feedback, FinCEN issued a Fact Sheet in October to help promote the 314(b) program and clarify how to participate. You can find the Fact Sheet on FinCEN’s website, and of course FinCEN’s Resource Center is always available to answer any questions you may have.
Value of BSA
When I spoke last year, I discussed the value of the BSA data, and I would like to revisit this issue again, not only in the context of the recent Madoff case, but to update you on how the Securities and Exchange Commission utilizes the SARs you file to support its own civil enforcement efforts.
As you all know, a financial institution files a suspicious activity report, or SAR, with FinCEN when it thinks a transaction may be suspicious. FinCEN, in turn, makes such SARs available to law enforcement and regulators, including the SEC.
However, recent actions taken by FinCEN underscore the catastrophic consequences that can flow when suspicions are not acted upon. When JPMorgan failed to file a SAR with FinCEN, an opportunity to stop Mr. Madoff’s fraud was missed. When TD Bank failed to file timely SARs, a massive Ponzi scheme went undetected for 18 months. Sadly, these are cases where frauds went unheard, leaving law enforcement and regulators, including the SEC, in the dark. Critical pieces of the puzzles were left out, and innocent people continued to be victimized.
While these are examples of missed opportunities, there are also many examples of how the SARs you file do make it into the right hands, help solve the puzzle, and in some cases are the tip-off that starts an investigation. Take for example the work going on within the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Division of Enforcement.
SEC’s Division of Enforcement places such value on your reporting that it maintains a group of attorneys and contract staff dedicated exclusively to BSA-related issues, including the review of SARs. Each year, the BSA Review Group within SEC’s Office of Market Intelligence reviews thousands of SARs filed by or about persons in the securities industry, or generally alleging securities fraud or securities law violations.
Last year, SEC’s BSA Review Group individually reviewed more than 21,000 SARs. In fact, if FinCEN receives a SAR from or about an entity, person, or transaction within SEC’s jurisdiction, the odds are quite high that someone at SEC will review it. On average, SEC staff obtain these SARs within a week of your submission, and Enforcement staff assess and forward them within an average of one week after that. Imagine, your SARs are read, assessed, and if they warrant action, in the hands of SEC investigators within an average of about two weeks from the day you submit them to FinCEN.
SEC Enforcement staff constantly compares the information they extract from SARs to data in their own databases and other sources to assess the allegations in the SARs. Out of those thousands of SARs, roughly one in ten provides SEC with valuable intelligence related directly to active SEC Enforcement matters. My friends at the SEC inform me that barely a week passes in which SEC Enforcement does not open a new investigation or examination based on information it received – at least initially – in a SAR; in fact SEC opened 42 new investigations and at least 14 exams in Fiscal Year 2013 and already has initiated 17 SAR-inspired investigations or examinations this Fiscal Year. The SEC has emphasized to me – and you can tell from these statistics – that they rely on your SAR reporting literally every day.
In addition to just those new investigations and exams, last year, SEC Enforcement filed nearly a dozen actions that originated from a SAR and made referrals to other agencies that resulted in even more. Among them were actions against four Ponzi schemes involving $14-25 million in losses to more than 50 investors (and victims), and a half dozen Insider Trading cases involving millions in profits or avoided losses. These are more examples of the coveted “but-for” cases I shared with you last year. By that I mean that but for the filing of SARs, these cases may have unfolded much differently, and much later.
Let me expand on that point for a moment. These examples illustrate not just the satisfying fact that your reporting is helping to expose Ponzi Schemes involving tens of millions of dollars in losses as well as other frauds, but that clear, timely information provided by compliance professionals like you increases the opportunities for government agencies to act and possibly to restrain or recover the wrongdoers’ assets so that victims can be at least partially made whole.
Aside from the day-to-day individual review of those thousands of SARs, SEC’s BSA Review Group also analyzes the entire collection of securities-related SARs. By that, I mean that they go beyond simply reviewing and analyzing the individual reports you prepare. In addition, SEC reviews the total of securities-related SARs to identify patterns and trends in the information. This type of analysis equips all of us together to determine whether there are compliance-related vulnerabilities in the system that we can close to further protect the markets and investors.
Partnership
As I noted last year, I recognize that financial institutions spend a great deal of time and money to comply with the BSA. And as such, we need to ask ourselves whether the money is being spent in the right way. So the question I asked all of us last year: Is there a delta between compliance risk and illicit finance risk?
Fortunately, we have the right forum in place to explore these questions. As a part of the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory Group, known as BSAAG, we formed a subcommittee aptly named the Delta Team, to start the conversation. I would like to update you on where we are with these efforts.
One of the common themes we heard across the industry is that additional information on money laundering trends ? including more specifics on schemes and methods for illicit finance and red flags ? would be helpful in aligning industry efforts with law enforcement priorities. This is something we certainly agree with.
We also heard that FinCEN needs to find ways for more dynamic, real-time information sharing, both by and between financial institutions, and with FinCEN and law enforcement. A key aspect here is to again promote information sharing between financial institutions through Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act.
As the financial intelligence unit for the United States, FinCEN must stay current on how money is being laundered in the United States, so that we can share this expertise with our many law enforcement, regulatory, industry, and foreign financial intelligence unit partners, and effectively serve as the cornerstone of this country’s AML/CFT regime.
FinCEN’s new Intelligence Division is positioned to do just that. In response to industry feedback on the need for more information sharing with industry, we have begun exploring new ways to expand information sharing from government to industry, where warranted. And our Intelligence Division is in the process of implementing a new concept whereby our analytical products will be provided to additional partners, including industry, whenever appropriate. We are working now on developing the product line, distribution methods, and dissemination restrictions.
In this vein, one area that we are currently trying to get a better handle on is the use of cash in the securities sectors for other countries. For example, FinCEN’s analysis recently revealed that Mexican casa de bolsas (Mexican securities firms) are starting to bring U.S. dollars into the United States and depositing this cash into U.S. financial institutions. To the extent that foreign securities are obtained more readily with cash, U.S. firms dealing with foreign firms should be mindful of the cash aspects and source of funding of their business, given the heightened money laundering risks associated with cash.
More broadly, when securities firms offer services similar to banks, they need to also consider the vulnerabilities associated with engaging in these types of services, and to make sure that their compliance programs are commensurate with such risks. To the extent that these entities are providing bank-like services, we need to make sure that essentially the same types of BSA obligations and compliance activities applicable to banks are in place – notwithstanding the fact that the institution might not be a bank.
FinCEN also continues to work with our colleagues at SEC, CFTC, Treasury, FINRA and NFA in the Securities and Derivatives Working Group to identify money laundering and terrorist financing vulnerabilities in the securities and derivatives markets. As a part of this effort, FinCEN has analyzed almost 28,000 SARs filed by securities and futures industry members and nearly 13,000 SARs filed by depository institutions that reported activities specifically related to suspected money laundering and terrorist financing within the securities and derivatives markets. There are also a few key take-aways which I can share with you.
First, the analysis showed that a large majority (roughly 80%) of SARs flagged for money laundering/structuring were reporting usage of brokerage accounts for “bank-like” activity in cash equivalents (wires, ACH transfers, and checks in particular.)
Second, the FinCEN analysis noted that about 20% of the SAR subjects used non-U.S. addresses, especially Latin American addresses. The team thought this supported the notion that broker-dealers, and depository institutions working with securities/derivatives industry clients, may face overseas risks.
Both of these take-aways are interesting in light of the trend I mentioned earlier wherein Mexican casas de bolsas are starting to bring U.S. dollars into the United States and depositing this cash into U.S. financial institutions.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize the importance of financial institutions providing the very best information possible in their SAR filings. As you can see from my remarks today, we take the information you provide very seriously, and the details you include help us identify and act upon your SARs more quickly.
Conclusion
One of the best parts of my job is getting the chance to build partnerships with those who are committed to safeguarding our financial system.
So in closing, I would like to thank all of you for the role that you play. Whether you are serving as the compliance officer within your financial institution, working as an examiner to ensure adequate BSA safeguards are in place, or utilizing the BSA data filed by financial institutions to investigate criminal activity, your role is essential.
The work you do each and every day helps prevent money launderers, terrorist financiers, and other illicit actors from abusing our financial system. I hope that it is clear that the government is using the product of your labor daily to act swiftly and decisively to counter illegal activity. I also hope that it reinforces for you, as it does for me, that the money and effort that you and your firms put into your AML programs is certainly worth it. I look forward to our ongoing partnership on these issues.
 



