Content



Contact
Office of Strategic Communications, 703-905-3770


Immediate Release
January 15, 2021




WASHINGTON—The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today announced that Capital One, National Association (Capital One) has been assessed a $390,000,000 civil money penalty for engaging in both willful and negligent violations of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and its implementing regulations.  
Specifically, FinCEN determined and Capital One admitted to willfully failing to implement and maintain an effective Anti-Money Laundering (AML) program to guard against money laundering.  Capital One also admitted that it willfully failed to file thousands of suspicious activity reports (SARs), and negligently failed to file thousands of Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs), with respect to a particular business unit known as the Check Cashing Group.  The violations occurred from at least 2008 through 2014, and caused millions of dollars in suspicious transactions to go unreported in a timely and accurate manner, including proceeds connected to organized crime, tax evasion, fraud, and other financial crimes laundered through the bank into the U.S. financial system.  As stated in the Assessment of Civil Money Penalty, Capital One admitted to the facts set forth by FinCEN and acknowledged that its conduct violated the BSA and regulations codified at 31 C.F.R. Chapter X. 
“The failures outlined in this enforcement action are egregious,” said FinCEN’s Director Kenneth A. Blanco.  “Capital One willfully disregarded its obligations under the law in a high-risk business unit.  Information received from financial institutions through the Bank Secrecy Act plays a critical role in protecting our national security, and depriving law enforcement of this information puts our nation and our people at risk.  Capital One’s failures did just that.  Capital One’s egregious failures allowed known criminals to use and abuse our nation’s financial system unchecked, fostering criminal activity and allowing it to continue and flourish at the expense of victims and other citizens.  These kinds of failures by financial institutions, regardless of their size and believed influence, will not be tolerated.  Today’s action should serve as a reminder to other financial institutions that FinCEN is committed to protecting our national security and the American people from harm and we will bring appropriate enforcement actions where we identify violations.”
As outlined in the Assessment, in 2008, after Capital One acquired several other regional banks, Capital One established the Check Cashing Group as a business unit within its commercial bank.  The group was comprised of between approximately 90 and 150 check cashers in the New York- and New Jersey-area.  Capital One provided banking services to the Check Cashing Group, including providing armored car cash shipments and processing checks deposited by Check Cashing Group customers.  During the course of establishing the Check Cashing Group and banking these customers, Capital One was aware of several compliance and money laundering risks associated with banking this particular group, including warnings by regulators, criminal charges against some of the customers, and internal assessments that ranked most of the customers in the top 100 of the bank’s highest risk customers for money laundering.  
Despite the warnings and internal assessments, Capital One willfully failed to implement and maintain an effective AML program in many ways.  Capital One’s process for investigating suspicious transactions was weak and resulted in the failure to fully investigate and report suspicious activity to FinCEN.  Capital One often failed to detect and report suspicious activity by the check cashers themselves, even as it detected and reported activity by the check casher’s customers.  And Capital One’s implementation of a specialized report to provide insight into larger checks cashed by the Check Cashing Group customers’ customers (the check cashers’ patrons) failed to properly connect and report suspicious banking activity by certain check cashers.
Capital One also acknowledged failing to file SARs even when it had actual knowledge of criminal charges against specific customers, including Domenick Pucillo, a convicted associate of the Genovese organized crime family.  Pucillo was one of the largest check cashers in the New York-New Jersey area, and one of the highest-risk Check Cashing Group customers.  Capital One was made aware of Pucillo’s participation in potential criminal activity and other risks on several occasions, including learning in early 2013 about potential criminal charges in two different jurisdictions.  Despite this information, Capital One failed to timely file SARs on suspicious activity by Pucillo’s check cashing businesses, and continued to process over 20,000 transactions valued at approximately $160 million, including cash withdrawals, for Pucillo’s businesses.  According to public sources, in May 2019 Pucillo pleaded guilty to conspiring to commit money laundering in connection with loan sharking and illegal gambling proceeds that flowed through his Capital One accounts.  
Capital One also admitted to negligently failing to file CTRs on approximately 50,000 reportable cash transactions representing over $16 billion in cash handled by its Check Cashing Group customers.  Specifically, Capital One utilized an internal system that assigned a “cash” code for customer withdrawals to trigger CTR filings.  In designing its system, Capital One failed to assign this “cash” code to armored car cash shipments for a number of Check Cashing Group customers.  Accordingly, these transactions were not identified as customer cash withdrawals and were not reported to FinCEN through Capital One’s CTR reporting systems.  
In determining the final amount of the civil money penalty, FinCEN considered Capital One’s significant remediation and cooperation with FinCEN’s investigation.  In addition to exiting the Check Cashing Group and taking specific remedial efforts related to its SAR and CTR filing systems, Capital One has made significant investments in and improvements to its AML program over the past several years.  The bank also provided FinCEN with voluminous and well-organized documents, made several presentations of its findings, and signed several agreements tolling the statute of limitations during this investigation.  FinCEN strongly encourages financial institutions and other businesses and individuals subject to the BSA to self-disclose any violations of FinCEN’s regulations and cooperate with its enforcement investigations.  
The mission of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering and its related crimes including terrorism, and promote national security through the strategic use of financial authorities and the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence.


Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content


February 06, 2020



 
 
 
SIFMA 20th Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and Financial Crimes Conference
New York City
 
On behalf of FinCEN Director Kenneth A. Blanco and the rest of the staff at FinCEN, I want to thank SIFMA for asking us to participate in SIFMA’s 20th annual AML conference.  We view it as an excellent opportunity to engage with an important group of industry stakeholders.  Yesterday, you heard from Laura Richardson from FinCEN’s Intelligence Division on how we use financial institution reporting, particularly in the case of identifying trends in elder fraud.  I also am happy to note that we have two other FinCEN staffers here:  Ted Vlahakis and Danica Hames from FinCEN’s Enforcement Division.  
I first came to this conference in 2007, about a half year after starting at FinCEN.  It became one of my favorite annual events because it provided a good opportunity for me to learn about a component of the financial sector that I did not know well.  As a group of professionals, the SIFMA community was very welcoming.  They also were very giving, particularly with their opinions on how our AML regime needed to be improved.  They also were quite passionate about making sure that I understood that not all financial institutions are banks.  They reflected what they perceived as a need for more particular guidance from—and attention of—FinCEN with respect to the nuances of the securities and futures industry.  
I want to do three things in my remarks this morning.  First, at SIFMA’s request, I want to reflect on some issues that I have seen with respect to BSA/AML in this sector since I first came to FinCEN.  Second, I want to reiterate the importance of what you do by highlighting the value of BSA information.  Finally, I want to share with you some thoughts about our current regulatory landscape. 
 
Through the years
When I first came to FinCEN in 2006 and to this conference in 2007, I had a couple of primary observations with respect to your industry and our regulation of it.  
The first observation involves the nature of this industry.  I recognized that the securities and futures sector includes a very complex group of inter-related parties handling various aspects of your transactions.  Different entities wear different hats at different times, depending on the types of activities.  FinCEN’s regulations in this space, then and now, only reference broker-dealers, mutual funds, introducing brokers in commodities, and futures commission merchants. But those broad categories cover an amazingly complex set of relationships.  Introducing firms, clearing firms, primary brokerages, executing dealers, transfer agents, give-up agreements, piggy-backing arrangements, and more.  
I joined FinCEN after the finalization of rules imposing special due diligence for certain foreign accounts under Section 312 of the PATRIOT ACT.  FinCEN was then in the midst of a series of guidance pieces directed to your community that had to spell out which parties were obligated to do what in terms of information collection and due diligence, and who could reasonably rely on whom to collect relevant information, given the various layers of actors and actions in your space that might all be linked to an ultimate customer.  I have learned a lot throughout this process through my interactions with SIFMA, its members, including many of you here, and many FinCEN staffers, past and present.  And through this, I have observed one issue in particular that still troubles me.
Our AML principles generally revolve around promoting appropriate transparency of transactions for the benefit of both the financial institutions processing them and FinCEN’s law enforcement stakeholders.  But the complexity of the transactions and relationships in your space present a challenge to transparency.  And when we talk about the concept of “knowing your customer,” we have to recognize that the culture of any highly competitive industry may discourage sharing customer information for the purpose of anti-money laundering or other financial crime prevention, when it could result in potentially losing a customer to a competitor.
I think that this dynamic continues to make your sector challenging from an AML regulatory perspective.  Currently, about 40 percent of depository institutions are registered to participate in business-to-business information sharing through the 314(b) program.  By comparison, only 14 percent of all entities in the securities sector that are eligible to register for this important information sharing mechanism do so.  Here is my question to you:  Does this lower registration rate reflect a culture that is more fearful of information sharing in your competitive environment?  
We are hopeful that at a time when we are all recognizing the importance of appropriate information sharing, your businesses will work toward the sharing of more information with one another, either bilaterally or through associations under 314(b), to root out illicit activity, while at the same time figuring out how to protect the information you share from being used to steal each other’s customers.  Where there is a will, there is a way.  There are those in this room who are leading the way toward better sharing of information in this sector.  It is our hope that others in this room will follow their lead, and we are happy to work with you.
The second observation involves the regulatory community in your space where we have made positive strides in terms of better communication and collaboration with one another.  When I first joined FinCEN, there were clearly disconnects in our relationships with our fellow regulators.  
Through the years, I have seen greater coordination and communication.  FinCEN has always promoted such coordination and continues to do so.  This is particularly important given that enforcement initiatives and heightened compliance in one part of the financial sector may result in illicit activity migrating to other sectors.  We have seen bad activity migrate from the banking sector to the capital markets.  We also have seen migration of bad activity from your sector to the banking sector.  Only through cross-agency coordination on these issues can each regulator do its best to advise and supervise its constituents. 
Recently, staff at FinCEN, the SEC, and FINRA got together with the banking regulator staff to discuss the potential migration of specific illicit activity to the banking sector as a result of greater scrutiny by the securities regulators with respect to offshore brokers attempting to use omnibus accounts for illicit purposes.  It is an example of the type of cross-regulator awareness and focus necessary to keep up with the various new ways in which illicit actors are trying to abuse the financial system. And with respect to cross-regulator collaboration, it is also important that each regulator sharing jurisdiction in this space focuses on what it can do best.  At FinCEN, our Enforcement Division has been emphasizing our own analysis and special information collection authorities to identify institutions of concern in addition to receiving referrals from our regulatory partners.  This enables us to initiate our own investigations and examinations or bring matters to the attention of our delegated examiners.  This focus is leading to increasing coverage of FinCEN in areas of greater concern with less overlap of efforts. 
I hope that you have also recognized greater coordination among the regulators through the years with respect to rulemaking and guidance.  The implementation of the Customer Due Diligence (CDD) and Beneficial Ownership rule is an example of this.  The rulemaking itself took several years of cross-agency coordination, and now in the first year and a half of its implementation, such coordination is again needed.  
FinCEN has always recognized that once a new rule goes into effect, it takes time for both the regulated and the regulator to address particular circumstances under the rule.  In rulemaking, even a rulemaking with robust notice and comment, including public sessions and other input from industry such as the CDD and Beneficial Ownership rule, there will be unanticipated situations after the rulemaking goes into effect.  
Last summer, FinCEN issued additional guidance on some of those situations and issued some appropriate exceptive relief to the requirements, and we continue to engage with industry and the regulatory community to identify other issues that may be arising in the implementation of and examination for compliance with the rule. 
 
BSA Value
I want to now spend some time reiterating the value of the information that you provide to us and the value of your efforts more broadly to make the financial system resilient to illicit activity.  Part of a strong culture of compliance is understanding how the information that you provide under the BSA is used.  The more we communicate how BSA data is used to root out illicit financial activity and support law enforcement, the more we hope to motivate you to provide this vital information.  It is not always a regulatory enforcement action that prompts compliance in this space.  We understand through countless discussions with industry that you are looking for feedback to enable you to do a better job at a task in which you as AML professionals take pride. 
As part of our feedback, let me provide you with some statistics:  
From the year that the first SAR-SF was filed in 2003, through the 2019 calendar year, the number of SARs filed annually by your sector has increased roughly eight-fold.  This still represents a small fraction of the roughly two million SARs filed per year.
FinCEN grants direct access to critical information reported by financial institutions to more than 13,000 agents, analysts, and investigative personnel from over 450 unique federal, state, and local agencies across the United States.
In addition, there are more than 100 Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) review teams and financial crimes task forces across the country, bringing together prosecutors and investigators from different agencies to review BSA reports.
Each day, FinCEN, law enforcement, regulators, and others query this data approximately 30,000 times—that equates to an average of 7.4 million queries per year.  Those queries touch an average of 18.2 million filings that are responsive or useful to ongoing investigations, examinations, victim identification, analysis and network development, sanctions development, and U.S. national security activities, among many, many other uses. 
The data is used to initiate investigations, expand existing investigations, and identify trends and focus resources, much as you saw yesterday in Laura Richardson’s discussion on what we can see in SARs on elder fraud.  And while not every piece of reporting may contribute to a specific law enforcement action, FinCEN has on its website roughly 500 specific examples of how financial institution reporting has aided law enforcement cases.  A portion of those examples were generated as a result of FinCEN’s annual Director’s Law Enforcement Awards. Since 2015, FinCEN has held an annual ceremony to recognize law enforcement agencies who have successfully used BSA reporting in their criminal investigations.  Each year, FinCEN receives nominations from Federal, state, local, and tribal law enforcement agencies all over the country, with the criteria being that the law enforcement agencies must have utilized the BSA data to successfully pursue and prosecute their case.  Reporting of institutions in this room has contributed to nominated and award winning cases, and FinCEN now sends out letters to those contributing financial institutions to make them aware of those contributions and to specifically thank them for their efforts. 
And don’t forget the deterrent value that your reporting and AML program efforts have.  Think of how much easier it would be for criminals to spend and move their ill-gotten gains if you were not doing what you are doing in terms of identifying and scrutinizing your customers and their activities.  At FinCEN, our BSA Value project is focused on chronicling all the ways in which BSA information is used, and coming up with a way to translate that value into metrics that will help us further refine our regulations and other efforts.
So please understand how much what you do matters.  Without your efforts, there would be more victims of fraud, more victims of drug-related crimes and human trafficking, and more corruption.  The integrity that you are responsible for maintaining in our financial system is a fundamental part of the rule of law that is so crucial to the success and security of our nation.
 
Regulatory Landscape
In shifting to a discussion about our current regulatory landscape, I want to share with you something that I raised on another occasion four years ago about what regulators experience when they encounter a changing landscape.  It’s something to think about whenever we go through a period of change—whether the calls for change arise from a crisis of confidence in our system, or whether they stem from a round of new and rapid development in the industries that we regulate.  
It hinges on the inevitable discussions as to whether government over-regulates or under-regulates industry.  The popular perception is that whenever government steps into an issue, it tends to over-regulate, and that whenever it fails to step into an issue, it is under-regulating.  From a regulator’s perspective, it is challenging to find the right balance.  
I picked up an idea on this topic several years ago from a training program for law enforcement and regulators.  The idea is relatively straightforward:  given the dynamic in which they operate, regulators may tend to under-regulate to avoid over-regulating.  In other words, they may tend to under-utilize their authorities out of fear of over-regulating, or out of fear of raising new questions or potential challenges to their authority.  
There is some wisdom to this approach.  But in an area such as ours where we have developed a strong partnership with industry and where we believe that you are just as vested in our mission to thwart bad actors as we are, it is important for us to use our authorities fully.  
So many of the things that FinCEN has been emphasizing over the past few years—our increased use of 314(a) and promotion of 314(b) to enhance information sharing between government and industry and among industry participants themselves; our increasing use of Geographic Targeting Orders (GTOs); our increasing and more direct outreach to particular financial institutions; the way that we are using our advisories, guidance, and conditional excepted relief—all of these things reflect a decision at FinCEN to continue to think creatively about how we use our statutory authorities, our regulations, and our status as the USG’s Financial Intelligence Unit and the administrator of the Bank Secrecy Act.  In each of these situations, we’ve chosen to be forward-leaning in our use or interpretation of our authorities.  
No system is perfect, and every system is in a perpetual state of evolution.  We are right now in an evolutionary state with respect to ways in which our financial sector is dealing with new technologies and new payment systems, such as those that involve virtual currency. 
On that point, let me take this opportunity to emphasize that actors working in these new systems for moving value are subject to the same AML principles and requirements as other financial institutions.  Social media and messaging platforms and others now focusing on the establishment of cryptocurrencies cannot turn a blind eye to illicit transactions that they may be fostering.  As we’ve said on other occasions, to the extent that the financial sector chooses to move forward with the opportunities that some of these emerging systems present, we are not going to allow it to slide backward on the protections and appropriate transparency that we have collectively worked so hard to weave into the financial system.  
We will judge emerging financial institutions on whether and how they make their systems resilient to, and report on, money laundering, terrorist financing, sanctions evasion, human and narco-trafficking, and other illicit activity. 
Make no mistake about it, whether it is through existing rules and guidance or future rules and guidance, we will regulate in this space consistent with the existing principles underlying the BSA/AML regime.  Industry will have to develop its new products and services to ensure appropriate transparency for law enforcement and national security purposes.  And where that doesn’t happen, we have the ability to protect our financial system.  
Something else that I want to bring to your attention with respect to trends in our regulatory environment is the focus on having more data and more metrics behind any changes that we make.  I earlier mentioned the BSA Value project, which we began last year and which is still proceeding.  The BSA Value project, through which many in industry have been asked to provide input, is our most comprehensive approach to date to measure all of the ways in which the data you provide is used.  
We need to have a thorough understanding of this as we consider future changes to the regulatory landscape.  We want to make sure that industry efforts are well spent, and that we have a more efficient system for getting important and valuable information from industry to law enforcement and regulatory stakeholders.  FinCEN’s steps in this regard are consistent with broader efforts in government to ensure data driven rulemaking and rational decision-making.  We need firmer metrics to make better decisions.  In the short term, this may slow the progress of certain categories of rulemaking and the issuance of certain types of guidance.  However, in the long run, focusing on metrics that support our actions may actually lead to more streamlined rulemaking processes in the future. 
However, there continues to be situations where we have limited information, despite a need for appropriate regulatory oversight.  Collection of beneficial ownership information at the corporate formation stage is an example.  We know through significant anecdotal information that legal entities can be attractive avenues for facilitating illicit activity because of the current lack of transparency in beneficial ownership information.  
But because no beneficial ownership information is collected at the corporate formation stage, we really don’t have firm baselines as to what types of situations may be more or less risky.  Solving the issue of appropriate collection and maintenance of beneficial ownership information is very much on the minds of Congress, and we continue to work with Congress on potential legislative solutions.  
To the extent that beneficial ownership legislation results in a requirement to report to FinCEN, FinCEN, as it always does, would work with the reporting community to address concerns that the community may have.  We do not take reporting efforts for granted and we strive to make the collections as painless and as efficient as possible.  We would work with trade associations and others to ensure that any requirements and exemptions are as clear as possible; that filings are promptly acknowledged; that high risk and low risk situations are dealt with commensurately, and that the value of, and protections associated with, the information collection are well understood.  
I want to close today by again reminding you of the importance of what you do.  You are a critical part of maintaining the integrity of our financial system, which is a critical part of maintaining respect for the rule of law.  The work that you do every day enables law enforcement to identify and take action against illicit actors from terrorists, to rogue regimes, to drug lords, to kleptocrats, to human traffickers, to fraudsters ripping off the elderly and abusing our health care system, and many others.  What you do saves lives directly, and makes our lives better.
And in terms of making our lives better, I want to share a story with you.  I have friends and family in different parts of the world.  One time I was visiting a close friend in one country, whom I hadn’t seen for a while.  I noticed that he seemed troubled when he was talking about his work.  I asked him to tell me what was going on.  He said he was involved in a public works project where he realized that substandard materials were being used illicitly, and when he raised it to his boss’s attention he was told to look the other way.  In the jurisdiction where he was working, he had to look the other way.  There were no protections for him and he had no faith that the system would eventually catch up with those that were cheating on the project.  
You might think that he would be able to shrug it off because it was taken for granted that it was just a part of life there, and that it wouldn’t bother him.  The point is that it did bother him.  Even though there was nothing he could do about it and he himself was not responsible, it weighed him down and eroded his faith in society.  Don’t underestimate the costs of such an erosion, and don’t underestimate the value of your own roles in preventing it.   
The work that you do to safeguard our financial system, and as partners in our efforts to assist law enforcement, is part of the reason that we have more faith in our system than my friend had in his.  No system is perfect and we have to deal with crime, fraud, and corruption here as they do elsewhere in the world, but you are an important and successful component in our efforts to fight it and to make the world a better place.  Thank you for your efforts and thank you for your time this morning.
###



Content



Advisory Information



fin-2009-a006.pdf164.43 KB

FIN-2009-A006

Issued Date
October 14, 2009



Subject
Advisory to Financial Institutions on Filing Suspicious Activity Reports Regarding TARP-related Programs




The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) is issuing this advisory so that financial institutions may better assist law enforcement when filing Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) on activities potentially related to the federal government’s Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) programs. This advisory furthers the Department of the Treasury's broader efforts to ensure that U.S. financial institutions are not used as conduits for illicit activity.1 Vigilance by financial institutions together with law enforcement efforts to combat illicit activity are important to allow the Financial Stability Plan programs to serve their purpose of laying the foundation for economic recovery. FinCEN requests that financial institutions follow the instructions under the “Suspicious Activity Reporting” section of this advisory for proper completion of SARs that involve TARP-related programs.
Descriptions of TARP-Related Programs
The U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve established 10 programs to respond to the credit crisis and help stabilize and strengthen the U.S. financial system. The Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (SIGTARP)2 has identified seven TARP-related programs, summarized in Appendix A with links to each program’s website, which financial institutions may recognize in the normal course of doing business. These programs authorize the allocation of substantial funds to a range of financial institutions and the customers they serve, and therefore, are vulnerable to various forms of fraud, money laundering and other financial crimes.
Information on TARP-related programs can be found at www.financialstability.gov. Information on SIGTARP can be found at www.sigtarp.gov. Financial institutions may contact SIGTARP directly at 202-927-9319 for further information, including whether a transaction or attempted transaction involving the institution relates to one of the programs.
Potential Indicators of Suspicious TARP-Related Activities
The trends and indicators of potential suspicious activity associated with the TARP-related programs are, in many cases, similar to the trends and patterns that financial institutions recognize in the context of non TARP-related transactions. Financial institutions should be able to utilize their Customer Identification Programs (CIP) and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Programs to aid in: (1) identifying customers who qualify for any TARP-related program funding; (2) anticipating the types of TARP-related transactions that may be conducted by such customers; and (3) identifying any suspicious activity attempted by these customers in the context of any TARP- related transactions. Likewise, financial institutions should avail themselves of public information in identifying transactions that might involve a TARP-related entity, such as wire transactions involving Capital Purchase Program (CPP)-funded banks or Public Private Investment Program (PPIP) Fund Managers.
The following examples are not an exhaustive listing of program related suspicious activity that may be revealed in a TARP-related transaction. These examples should be considered in light of a financial institution’s unique business plan, operations, customers and customer transactions, to determine whether filing a SAR is appropriate.
Conflicts of Interest: Some TARP-related programs, such as the PPIP (or PPIF),3 are structured to benefit service providers. By their nature and design, including the availability of significant leverage, PPIP transactions in a stagnant mortgage-backed securities market will have a significant impact on how particular assets are priced in the market. As a result, the increase in the price of such an asset will likely benefit anyone who already owns or manages the same asset, potentially including the PPIP manager making investment decisions. One example of a type of activity that may raise suspicions are multiple transactions over a short time period (e.g., "flipping") that result in a rapid increase in asset valuation in an otherwise stagnant product or geographical market. Institutions involved in these transactions would include specifically qualified funds or other financial and investment professionals in narrowly defined markets.
Collusion: Another potential activity is PPIP managers who might be persuaded, through kickbacks, quid pro quo transactions, or other collusive arrangements, to manage the PPIPs for personal gain rather than for the benefit of the PPIP (and, by extension, taxpayers). Some businesses may attempt to structure transactions in a way that disguises collusion among the parties in violation of applicable program prohibitions. One indicator of illegal collusion may be anomalous or out-of-market pricing of assets in seemingly arm’s-length transactions among affiliated parties. Additionally, nominee or front individuals or entities could appear in the transactions.
Insider Trading: Due to the significant level of involvement by the federal government and the substantial investment that TARP-related funds represent in existing markets, there is considerable opportunity for insiders to benefit from the diversion of funds before the public disclosure of a TARP-related transaction. For example, one red flag might be a spike in the volume of trading in a particular CPP-funded public company immediately prior to a public announcement of the approval, receipt, use of or repayment of TARP-related funds. Insider trading suspicions involving a TARP funding recipient company may – depending on the circumstances – be considered a violation of applicable TARP requirements due to the fungibility of the funds. Since most insider trading is identified retrospectively – i.e., after an announcement – a review of trading in the days prior to the announcement of, for example, activities involving CPP-funded banks may reveal suspicious trading activity.
Advanced Fee Schemes: Please refer to guidance FinCEN issued in April, 2009 for further information on filing SARs related to loan modification/foreclosure rescue scams in the context of residential mortgages.4
Money Laundering: Because of the significant leverage that may be exercised by recipients of PPIP and TALF funds, and the government support of the markets through related transactions, these programs present an opportunity to money-laundering organizations, which are continually looking for ways to "launder" their illicit proceeds. Such transactions might closely resemble traditional money laundering transactions, but would be related to the above-mentioned programs or the trading of mortgage-backed securities.
For additional information on enforcement actions taken, and fraudulent schemes identified, by SIGTARP you may refer to their quarterly reports to Congress.5
Suspicious Activity Reporting
In order to assist law enforcement in investigating and prosecuting possible criminal activity that involves TARP-related government programs, FinCEN requests that, when reporting suspicious activity, financial institutions check the appropriate box on the SAR form to indicate the type of suspicious activity and include the term “SIGTARP” in the narrative portion of the SAR.
We further request that the Suspect/Subject Information Section of the SAR include all information available for each party suspected of engaging in the suspicious activity – including information such as individual or company name, address, phone number and any other identifying information.6 As noted in FinCEN’s SAR Narrative Guidance Package,7 financial institutions must provide complete and sufficient descriptions of known or suspected criminal violations or suspicious activity in the narrative sections of SARs.
FinCEN will continue to monitor SARs that identify TARP-related fraud and related crimes and report findings and emerging trends in future advisories and guidance as appropriate. FinCEN also continues to support the SIGTARP and other law enforcement authorities, including in the context of the TALF-PPIP Task Force8, in the investigation and prosecution of financial crimes. Financial institutions with questions or comments regarding the contents of this Advisory should contact FinCEN's Regulatory Helpline at 800-949-2732.
 
Appendix A
Description of TARP Programs

PROGRAM
DESCRIPTION
Capital Purchase Program (CPP)
Treasury allocated $250 billion to CPP to provide funds to qualified financial institutions to build capital, increase the flow of financing, and support the economy. These funds are provided via Treasury’s purchase of senior preferred stock from the financial institutions. The financial institutions also provide Treasury 10-year warrants to purchase additional stock in consideration for the funding.
Automotive Industry Financing Program (AIFP)
Through the AIFP, Treasury provided emergency loans to General Motors Corporation, Chrysler Holding LLC, and Chrysler Financial Services Americas LLC. Additionally, Treasury purchased senior preferred shares from GMAC LLC, took back warrants to purchase additional stock, and modified the loan terms to General Motors Corporation and Chrysler Holding LLC.
Capital Assistance Program (CAP)
Pursuant to the CAP, financial institutions with more than $100 billion in assets were required to undergo a “stress test.” If, as a result of the stress test, an institution was found to need additional capital, it is given six months to raise private capital; and, if it is unable to do so, then it must accept CAP assistance. In this context, CAP assistance represents Treasury purchasing convertible preferred shares (convertible to common stock) and taking back warrants to purchase additional stock. All other participants in the CPP program are also permitted to apply for additional financial assistance under the CAP (without undergoing a stress test) as well as exchanging the senior preferred shares issued to Treasury under CPP into convertible preferred shares.
Unlocking Credit for Small Businesses (USCB)
Through USCB, Treasury purchases securities backed by Small Business Administration loans. Treasury also called upon the 21 largest financial institutions to begin reporting the amount of their small business lending.
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF)
Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve Bank of NY can issue up to $1 trillion in non-recourse loans to investors to make credit more available to consumers and small businesses. As collateral for these loans, the Federal Reserve will receive an interest in securities backed by credit cards, SBA loans, student loans, auto loans, and commercial mortgages. (The TALF may be expanded to allow the posting of securities backed by residential mortgages.)
Making Home Affordable Program (MHA)
MHA, also sometimes referred to as HAMP (Home Affordable Modification Program), is a multi-faceted foreclosure mitigation program. In connection with the program, among other things, Treasury pays incentives to servicers to reform mortgages down to 31% of adjusted income, and to mortgagors for remaining current on their mortgages.
Public Private Investment Program (PPIP)
Pursuant to the PPIP, Treasury will select fund managers, who will raise private capital that will be matched by TARP funds and leveraged with TARP loans. The managers will purchase and manage so-called “troubled” assets. PPIP is also sometimes referred to as PPIF (Public-Private Investment Fund).


1 Financial institutions are reminded of their obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act and the regulations at 31 C.F.R. Part 103 to implement risk-based policies, procedures, and processes, including those relating to customer due diligence, to avoid misuse of the U.S. financial system and aid in the identification of potentially suspicious transactions.
2 SIGTARP was established by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (“EESA”). The responsibilities of SIGTARP include conducting, supervising and coordinating audits and investigations related to TARP
3 PPIP is also sometimes referred to as PPIF (Public-Private Investment Fund).
4 See Guidance to Financial Institutions on Filing Suspicious Activity Reports regarding Loan Modification/Foreclosure Rescue Scams, FIN-2009-A001, April 6, 2009 at https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/fin-2009-a001.pdf.
5 The Initial Report to Congress (February 6, 2009) and Quarterly Reports to Congress are available at http://www.sigtarp.gov/reports.shtml.
6 If multiple subjects are involved and the financial institution is filing a paper form, the filer should file one SAR and complete a subject information section for each subject.
7 See https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/sarnarrcompletguidfinal_112003.pdf
8 The TALF-PPIP Task Force is a multi-agency task force designed to deter, detect and investigate instances of fraud related to the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility program which was expanded to also include the Public-Private Investment Plan program.



Content



Advisory Information



advissu4.pdf105.91 KB

Issue 4

Issued Date
August 01, 1996



Subject
FATF-VII Report on Money Laundering Typologies




FinCEN Advisory
This advisory is provided to alert recipients to known or suspected money laundering schemes reported by members of the Financial Action Task Force.
The new era of financial globalization is altering the roles of thefinancial, regulatory and law enforcement communities—they must now work closely together to combat money laundering.
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF), created by the G-7, is an international organization comprised of representatives of the financial,regulatory and law enforcement communities from 26 nationsaround the world, the European Commission and the Gulf CooperationCouncil. It serves as the world leader in promoting the developmentof effective anti-money laundering controls and cooperation incounter-money laundering investigations among its membership and around the globe.
In June, FATF revised its standards for countries to follow in combating the laundering of criminal proceeds. These standards are known as the 40 Recommendations. In addition to the revised 40 Recommendations, FATF also disseminated the results of a "typologiesexercise" which highlights new money laundering methods and patterns of activities used by criminals.
In keeping with FinCEN’s role as an information sharing network to assist the financial, regulatory and law enforcement communitiesin combating money laundering and other financial crimes, we are disseminating the attached FATF-VII Report on Money LaunderingTypologies. We are providing this information to alert you to the variety of techniques and the changing methods being used by money launderers around the world.
For more information about FATF and its efforts to address the problem of money laundering, please visit the FinCEN web site at http://www.ustreas.gov/treasury/bureaus/fincen.
We hope that you will find this information useful.
Stanley E. Morris
Director
 
 
FinCEN Advisory is a product of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,Department of the Treasury, Post Office Box 39, Vienna, Virginia 22183.For more information about FinCEN’s programs, visit the FinCEN web site at https://www.fincen.gov. General questions or comments regarding FinCEN publications should be addressed to the Office of Communications, FinCEN, (703) 905-3773.Information may also be faxed to (703) 905-3885.
 
 
 
Attachment:
 
 
 
FATF-VIIANNEX 3
28 June 1996
 

FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE ON
			MONEY LAUNDERING
			FATF-VII REPORT ON MONEY LAUNDERING
			TYPOLOGIES

 
 
FATF-VII REPORT ON MONEY LAUNDERING TYPOLOGIES
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION
1. The group of experts met in Paris on 28-29 November 1995 under the chairmanship of Mr. JeanSpreutels, President, Cellule de Traitement des Informations Financières (CTIF), Belgium. The group included representatives from FATF members Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France,Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Experts from non-member, observer organisations Interpol and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) werepresent as well.
2. The purpose of the 1995/1996 “typologies exercise” was to provide a forum for law enforcementexperts — those primarily tasked with combating money laundering — to discuss recent trends in thecleansing of criminal proceeds, emerging threats, and effective countermeasures. While the discussions focused principally on money laundering developments in FATF member nations, the experts also sought to pool available information on prevailing laundering patterns in non-member countries or regions. In this vein, the disposal of illicit funds by interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc was accorded significant attention.
3. In a departure from the previous session, distinct segments of the 1995/1996 typologies exercisewere devoted to reviewing available information on money laundering in the securities and insuranceindustries. These subjects were built into the 1995/1996 agenda in an effort to flesh out evidence,surfacing during the 1994/1995 experts session, which suggested that money launderers were using these sectors to ply their trade. To facilitate the dialogue, members were invited to include in their delegationsexperts from the insurance and securities industries.
 
II. MAGNITUDE AND GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE OF THE MONEY LAUNDERING PROBLEM
4. It was agreed that as part of their advance preparation for the meeting, the experts would endeavour to determine the amount of money laundering occurring in their countries, with a view toward arriving at an estimate for all FATF members. Some members were able to produce an estimate based on narcotics seizures in their jurisdiction, in accordance with a method the FATF had used in 1990 (SeeFATF-I Report).
5. Unfortunately, the vast majority of members lack sufficient data to support credible estimates.Several experts identified as the best available evidence statistics regarding the number of suspicious transaction reports filed in their countries and the amounts involved in those transactions. As some acknowledged, however, it would be difficult to formulate a projection based on this information. The mere registering of a report of suspicious activity does not necessarily establish that money laundering has in fact occurred. While some members were able to establish with certainty the link between suspicious transaction reports and criminal activity, they generally were able to do so for only a portion of the reports they had received. Moreover, it was assumed that suspicious transactions reports do not account for all instances of money laundering.
6. Other experts offered data on sums seized pursuant to money laundering investigations orprosecutions. This information too does not appear to support a valid estimate of the amount of tainted funds entering the legitimate financial stream, as one member’s experience demonstrates. One of the law enforcement agencies in this country reported that the aggregate volume of assets seized within its borders is decreasing, while other agencies detected higher levels of money laundering activity.
7. A few experts cited figures representing deposits or investments from countries known to be bases of operations for significant criminal enterprises. Representatives from one member, for example, estimated an influx of between $ US 40-50 million from interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. Again, these numbers cannot sustain a defensible estimate of laundered funds. In most cases, authorities have not been able to confirm that the funds were of illegal origin.
8. Despite the difficulties attendant to calculating the size of the money laundering problem, the experts favoured pressing forward with attempts to do so. They agreed that a statistically significant estimate would provide a wealth of information for the FATF, member governments, and the private sector.
9. One delegation introduced the results of a recently conducted study measuring the scope of itsmoney laundering problem. The study included a review of official crime statistics, as well as anecdotal evidence based on expert opinion. It projected the amount of money laundered in this country to be approximately $ US 4.55 billion per year. The experts determined to review the methodology employed in the study to determine whether it can be translated into a broader examination of the money laundering problem within the FATF, or even globally.
 
III. RECENT TRENDS AMONG FATF MEMBERS
A. The Principal Sources of Illegal Proceeds
10. Drug trafficking and financial crime (bank fraud, credit card fraud, investment fraud, advance feefraud, embezzlement and the like) remain the most frequently mentioned sources of illegal proceeds. Onthe whole, drug trafficking is still considered the largest single generator of tainted funds, but the scale of laundering linked to financial crime is growing rapidly. In fact, some Scandinavian members reported vastly greater levels of illicit profits stemming from financial crime than from narcotics.
11. Organised crime continues to be responsible for a large proportion of the dirty money flowing through financial channels. The Italian Mafia, the Japanese yakuza, the Colombian cartels, Russian andEastern European criminal enterprises, American ethnic gangs, and other, similarly structured groups are involved in a wide range of criminal activities. In addition to drug trafficking, these enterprises generate funds from loan sharking, illegal gambling, fraud, embezzlement, extortion, prostitution, illegal trafficking in arms and human beings, and a host of other offences. Frequently, they maintain extensive holdings in legitimate businesses which can be manipulated both to cloak and to invest illegally generated funds.
B. Prevailing Trends and Emerging Threats in Money Laundering
12. Two general observations can be made regarding current money laundering trends which cutacross the FATF membership. First, certain traditional money laundering techniques remain preferred avenues for hiding ill-gotten wealth. Second, beyond conventional laundering techniques, the expertshave become alert to new developments occurring in the financial sector which may present significant money laundering threats.
(i) Traditional Laundering Techniques: Banking Sector
13. As they have been historically, banks remain an important mechanism for the disposal of criminal proceeds. The experts reported a number of patterns of activity indicative of laundering in the banking sector.
14. One such pattern is the use of accounts in false names, or in the name of persons or interests operating on behalf of other beneficiaries. The latter category includes a class of money laundering agents such as solicitors, attorneys and accountants (a theme discussed more fully in Paragraph 25below). It also includes shell or front companies. In all cases, the accounts are utilised to facilitate the deposit or transfer of illicit funds. Often, there are complex layers of transactions involving multiple accounts in the names of multiple persons, businesses or shell companies.
15. The experts noted several characteristics probative of laundering through such accounts. Forexample, transaction activity in the accounts often occurs in amounts greater than that which ordinarily would be expected given the purported nature of the account holder’s business. In addition,documentation offered to support transactions, such as loan agreements, guarantees, purchase or salecontracts, and letters of credit, often appears false or legally deficient. If the account holder is a business, the business frequently has been incorporated or registered with the local chamber of commerce for only a short period of time. And in many cases, the parties on both sides of the transactions appear to be related. Indeed, the parties may even be the same. These trends have been particularly apparent in accounts opened and maintained by persons or concerns tied to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
16. Another trend identified by some delegations is the use of representative offices of foreign banks to dispose of criminal proceeds. Representative offices may offer an important advantage to money launderers. In some countries, though not all, representative offices can accept deposits and then transfer the funds to their own accounts with a local bank, without disclosing the identities of the depositors and beneficiaries.
17. In addition to the typologies outlined above, other familiar laundering techniques continue to figure prominently in the banking sector. Wire transfers remain a primary tool at all stages of thelaundering process. Transactions are still structured, even when there are no large cash reporting requirements. And large cash deposits are still being made in some areas, especially by persons and interests connected to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
(ii) Traditional Laundering Techniques: Non-Banking Sector1
18. Non-bank financial institutions and non-financial businesses are still attractive avenues for introducing ill-gotten gains into regular financial channels. Some delegations continue to report asignificant shift in laundering activity from the traditional banking sector to the non-bank financial sector and to non-financial businesses and professions.
19. Bureaux de change pose an increasing money laundering threat. The experts cited an apparent marked increase in the number and volume of transactions conducted through these entities, and acommensurate rise in actual or suspected laundering activity. The criminal element continues to be attracted to bureaux de change because they tend not to be as heavily regulated as banks and other traditional financial institutions — if they are regulated at all.
20. Another important trend has been the rise of a class of professional money laundering facilitators. The experts report an increase in the number of solicitors, attorneys, accountants, financial advisors, notaries and other fiduciaries whose services are employed to assist in the disposal of criminal profits. Among the more common tactics observed have been the use of solicitors’ or attorneys’ client accounts for the placement and layering of funds. This method offers the launderer the anonymity of the solicitor-client privilege.
21. Other ploys include the establishment of shell corporations, trusts or partnerships by attorneys,accountants and other professionals. Working through these business entities, the professionals spin webs of intricate transactions to mask the origin of criminally derived funds and to conceal the identities of the parties and beneficiaries. In many cases, the professionals will act as directors, trustees, or partners in these transactions, or they will supply nominal directors, trustees, or partners.
22. One of the oldest money laundering techniques, common smuggling, appears to be on the rise.A number of experts reported an appreciable increase in the amount of cash moving covertly acrossborders. Smuggling can occur by physically transporting currency or monetary instruments, or by hidingthe cash in outbound cargo shipments. Criminals have shown growing sophistication in these operations,often purchasing businesses engaged in the shipment of goods and hiding dirty money inside the product. Experts are also detecting a significant amount of cash stockpiling, particularly in port or border regions — a phenomenon generally regarded as a step precedent to smuggling. Both trends have been attributed in part to the success of anti-money laundering measures in banks and other financial institutions.
23. A number of other money laundering techniques in the non-bank sector remain prominent.Substantial amounts of illegal proceeds, or at least funds of potentially criminal origin, are still being invested in real estate. This trend increasingly is linked to interests in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc. The purchase and import/export of gold and jewellery remains a frequently cited trend as well. Finally, the use of international trade in the money laundering process is growing. The proceeds of crime are used to purchase goods and products which are then shipped out of the country for re-sale.
(iii) Emerging Threats: Banking Sector
24. In addition to the more familiar money laundering methods discussed above, the emergence of new payment technologies has presented new challenges. The banking and financial services industryhas been developing and testing an array of new products, referred to generally as “cyberpayments,”designed to act as cash surrogates or to provide alternative means of effecting transactions.
25. A key component of cyber payments technology is the use of so-called “smart cards,” credit-cardlike devices containing a microchip on which value is encoded. The cards can be read by vending machines or terminals that deduct the amount of each transaction from the total stored value. When thecard’s value is used up, it may be re-loaded via ATM, telephone, “electronic wallet” or personal computer, or it may be discarded. The term cyber payments also includes “electronic banking“ systems wherein value is held in a personal computer and transferred electronically over the Internet.
26. Early cyberpayments products tended to be very limited in application. For the most part, theyoperated in a closed system; transactions had to begin and/or conclude at a financial institution. They also placed limits on the active life of the cards, or on the amount of value that could be stored on them. The telephone cards in use in many European nations are an example of this predecessor technology.
27. More recently, however, cyber payments developers have been experimenting with fewer restrictions. These new products have higher or even no value limits. They can be used at any participating retail establishment. Some will permit value to be stored and transactions conducted inmultiple currencies. And, most disturbingly, some will allow value to be accessed and transferred without the need for financial institution intervention.
28. Clearly, this technology offers tremendous benefits for both government and private business.Instantaneous access to banking services from remote locations can enhance efficiency and reduce operating expenses. Unfortunately, the same advantages cyber payments generate for legitimate commerce render it equally attractive to the criminal element. The ability to conduct significant transactions anonymously and entirely outside the banking system could enable launderers to skirt the regime of cash and financial institution-based preventative measures FATF members have worked sodiligently to implement.
29. At present, the experts have no evidence to suggest that cyber payments technologies are being manipulated by criminal interests. Still, there was general agreement that this issue must be addressed directly. Given the speed with which the cyber payments industry is developing, and the fundamental threat its abuse would pose to existing anti-money laundering mechanisms, the FATF cannot afford to wait until the launderers have already begun to exploit cyber payments products. Rather, the experts were adamant that the FATF must be proactive, working with the vendors and users of cyberpayments technology to identify vulnerabilities, and to build the appropriate safeguards into system design and operation.
(iv) Emerging Threats: Non-Banking Sector
30. Outside of the banking context, the casino industry has recently been identified as vulnerable tomoney laundering. Willing casinos would be attractive to money launderers because they frequently provide the same services as do banks (including extending credit, changing currency, and transmitting funds). However, those experts who cited casinos as a potential problem were quick to note that money laundering does not appear to be prevalent in the industry at this time.
(v) Special Section: Insurance
31. Expanding on evidence uncovered during last year’s typologies exercise, a number of money laundering trends were identified or suspected in the insurance sector. The experts reported that single premium insurance bonds of one sort or another continue to be increasingly popular. Launderers purchase these products and then redeem them at a discount, the balance becoming available to the launderer in the form of a “sanitised” check from an insurance company. Single premium insurance bonds have another advantage as a money laundering vehicle because they can be used as guarantees for loans from financial institutions.
32. Another problematic aspect of the insurance industry noted by many members is the fact that asignificant percentage of insurance products are sold through intermediaries. These brokers are often the only ones having personal contact with the clients. Yet, it is the insurance companies, and not the brokers, that are responsible for reporting suspicious activity.
33. Several experts offered a sampling of the kinds of activity which should arouse suspicion inconnection with the purchase of insurance products. The insurance companies should be on alert when acash payment is made upon subscription and the subscriber changes his mind during the legalcancellation period. Another suspicious circumstance occurs where a single premium policy purchase ismade in cash or by cashier’s check in an amount that is patently disproportionate to the subscriber’s stated occupation or income. A subscription for a large amount, the premiums to be paid from abroad (often from an offshore financial centre) is patently suspect. So too is a subscription calling for the periodic payment of premiums in large amounts.
34. During the life of the insurance product, insurance companies should be concerned when thenamed beneficiary of a policy is changed to a person with no clear relationship to the subscriber. Inaddition, insurance companies should look carefully when they receive a request for security or acertificate that funds have been invested with the insurer.
35. At the termination stage, suspicions should heighten when a client displays no concern for significant tax or other penalties associated with early cancellation. Insurance companies should also pay attention to capitalisation bond redemptions requested by persons other than the subscriber. This is particularly the case when the redeemer and subscriber appear to bear no relationship to one another. Finally, firms should scrutinise cases where bonds originally subscribed by an individual in one country are redeemed by a business in another country.
36. A number of experts mentioned as an emerging trend the laundering of funds through the reinsurance industry. Criminal enterprises appear to be moving money to this sector to take advantage of its unregulated or under-regulated status.
37. Another note worthy trend is the purchase of life insurance policies in the secondary market.Criminal interests may be purchasing these policies at a discount from beneficiaries desperate for cash. The death benefits are then paid to the purchaser, who makes a profit and receives his money in the form of an insurance company check.
(vi) Special Section: Securities
38. The FATF remains concerned about the susceptibility of the securities industry to money laundering. The experts presented more evidence than last year that the securities sector was being compromised by tainted funds. As compared to the analysis of the insurance industry, however, thevolume of proof is still limited.
39. Nevertheless, it remains the general opinion of the experts that the securities sector is vulnerable to infiltration by money launderers, particularly at the layering stage. A number of features make this business an attractive target. First, it is by nature international. Brokerage firms frequently have offices all over the world, and it is ordinary for transactions to be conducted by wire transfer from, to or through multiple jurisdictions. Second, the securities markets are highly liquid. Purchases and sales can be made and settlements consummated within a very short period of time. Third, securities brokers operate in a competitive environment. Because their compensation is often based primarily on sales commissions, there is ample incentive to disregard the source of client funds. Finally, in some countries, securities accounts can be maintained by brokerage firms as nominees or trustees, thus permitting the identities of true beneficiaries to be concealed.
40. Several experts reported cases in which securities were purchased or sold, or securities accountsmanipulated, in an effort to cleanse criminal profits. They sometimes entailed many series of transactions, with purchases and sales being made by shell companies, limited partnerships and front companies so as to mask the identities of the real parties in interest. In addition, a number of the cases involved a securities industry professional who actively assisted in a money laundering scheme.
41. One delegation cited a case in which a securities professional laundered over $ US 157,000 onbehalf of a client, a public official who had misappropriated over $ US 1.4 million. The professional first opened an account in the name of the client’s wife, into which the proceeds of a legitimate real estate sale were deposited. He then engaged in a series of fraudulent “put” and “call “ transactions on the client’s behalf, fabricating contracts after the price trends of the underlying securities were already known. The contracts were designated as a put or a call based on the established price trend of the security, so as to ensure in every case that the client would realise a profit. Through this process, the professional was able to introduce over $ US 157,000 in tainted funds into the client’s account and justify its presence on the books as profit from securities investments.
42. Detecting money laundering activity in the securities context continues to be very difficult. Theexperts noted that additional efforts must be expended to identify the indicia of suspicious activity in this area. Several cited difficulty in discerning whether the funds involved in suspicious transactions were actually criminally derived.
43. Despite these difficulties, the experts agreed that it is important to forge ahead with efforts toaddress money laundering through the securities sector, in tandem with the securities regulators and the major exchanges.
C. Developments in Counter-Measures
44. Nearly all FATF members have implemented the major elements of the Forty Recommendations.However, a number have made refinements to their basic anti-money laundering framework (or intend todo so) in light of the changing nature of the threat they face. The following are some of the morenoteworthy developments either already undertaken or planned.
45. Almost all members that have not already done so are taking action to extend the scope of theirmoney laundering offence to non-drug related crimes. This trend is continuing in response to growingevidence regarding the significance of non-drug related crime as a source of illegal wealth. Examplesinclude one member, which has pending a bill to criminalise money laundering in connection with all serious crimes (including tax fraud). Another member has introduced draft legislation to includeterrorism, financial crime, corruption, kidnapping, extortion and other crimes as predicate offences within the ambit of its money laundering statute.
46. Similarly, members are continuing to extend the reach of money laundering prevention measuresto additional groups of businesses and institutions. The general thrust of these changes is to provide for more comprehensive coverage of non-bank financial institutions — in recognition of the large scalemigration of criminal funds to this sector. Thus one member enacted legislation requiring bureaux dechange to register with its central banking authority. The statute subjects bureaux de change to strict conditions of management integrity, identification, and compliance with disclosure obligations. Another member has passed legislation bringing consumer credit firms, mortgage companies, financial leasing companies and firms issuing or managing credit cards within the scope of its anti-money laundering framework. Another still has included casinos and some sellers of luxury items in its draft anti-money laundering law.
47. Some members have taken steps to better facilitate the investigation and dismantling of potentialmoney laundering operations. One, for example, has enacted legislation which allows a court to assumethat all assets held by a defendant are the proceeds of crime if the defendant is convicted of two or more serious offences (which includes laundering the proceeds of crime). One member is also modifying its legislation to lessen the burden of proof for prosecutors regarding the illegal origin of funds, and another has done so.
48. Several members have heightened efforts to invigorate the private sector in the battle against money laundering. One has established a working group comprised of representatives from the financial services sector (including non-bank financial institutions), the regulatory authorities and the law enforcement community. The group meets regularly to discuss the impact and utility of existing and proposed anti-money laundering regulations, as well as trends in criminal practices. Other members are generating or improving guidelines on suspicious transactions for dissemination to financial institutions, and pursuing money laundering awareness programs targeting at-risk industries.
49. Finally, one member is testing a program whereby financial institutions will have at their disposal computerised systems for detecting patterns of related transactions which may be indicative of money laundering. However, the system does not automatically generate reports of suspicious transactions and the financial institution’s compliance officer must determine whether a report is warranted.
D. The Situation in Non-FATF Members
50. Money laundering obviously is not a problem restricted to FATF members. All jurisdictionslinked to the international financial system are at least potentially capable of being infiltrated by illicit funds. Information on the money laundering situations in non-FATF members continues to be substantially less developed than that covering FATF members. Indeed, with the exception of the FormerSoviet Union and Eastern Bloc, members had little information to report regarding money laundering developments in other parts of the world.
51. The following sections thus reference information which surfaced during last year’s typologies exercise. The membership has no evidence to suggest that these earlier reported trends have changed appreciably. Also referenced in the section pertaining to Asia are summary conclusions from a recentty pologies exercise on Asian money laundering trends sponsored by the FATF Asian Secretariat.
(i) Asia (Excluding the Former Soviet Union)
52. The money laundering situation in Asia is characterised by several factors, although not all ofthese factors are unique to the region. First, Asian economies typically are very cash intensive, and there generally are no mechanisms in place to track large cash transactions. Second, underground banking (known variously as hundi, hawalla, chit or fei-chien systems, according to the area and ethnic groups involved) is a long-standing tradition in this part of the world. Underground banking offers a quick, cheap, efficient and anonymous means of moving money. One member observed that the rates charged by Asian underground banks tend to be extremely competitive as compared to the prevailing charges for disposing of criminal funds in other regions. Finally, few non-FATF countries in Asia have anti-money laundering laws on the books.
53. Drug trafficking has been identified as one of the principal sources of illegal proceeds in the Asian region. In the Golden Crescent (Afghanistan and Pakistan) and Golden Triangle (Myanmar, Laosand Thailand), Asia contains the world’s most significant areas of opium production. The other primary source of illegal wealth is financial crime. Smuggling, arms trafficking and corruption were also cited as less significant sources.
54. Not surprisingly, organised crime figures prominently in all of these activities. The Japanese yakuza is one of the world’s most prominent and profitable criminal organisations. Evidence indicates that the yakuza is investing in assets in various Asian and Pacific countries. In addition, overseas Chinese organised crime groups are engaged in criminal enterprises in Asia and elsewhere in the world. There are also terrorist groups in India using crime to fund their operations. And there are signs that Russian criminal enterprises are extending into East and South East Asia, supplying Russian prostitutes, buying real estate and becoming involved in gambling operations.
55. Among the money laundering techniques most frequently employed in the Asian region are:currency smuggling across national borders; the use of shell corporations; the use of bearer instruments; the use of wire transfers; the use of remittance services; the purchase of luxury items and real estate; false invoicing; laundering through casinos; and laundering through securities transactions.
(ii) South America, Central America and the Caribbean
56. South America is one of the most important areas in the world for narcotics production,particularly cocaine and cannabis. Central America and the Caribbean are significant transit areas fornarcotics. Drug production and trafficking are therefore a very significant source of illegal proceeds in these regions.
57. Money laundering methods in this part of the world are in many respects similar to those in FATFmembers. Counter-measures are substantially underdeveloped, however, and as a consequence the banking sector is still of great importance at the placement stage. This reflects the important role offshore financial centres (particularly some of the Caribbean jurisdictions) play in the global money laundering process. There is considerable physical movement of currency from North America and Western Europe into the region, which is then deposited in banks or used to purchase high value items. Criminal funds are also invested in the construction of luxury hotels and supermarkets with apparently little effort to conceal the source of the investment. In other areas, supposedly legitimate commercial transactions are used as a cover for repatriating proceeds of crime via over or under-valued invoices for the material.
58. Some members reported on important new initiatives being pursued in the region. Onedelegation noted that the thirty-four governments in the Western Hemisphere would soon be signing aCommuniqué on money laundering. The Communiqué, part of the follow up to the 1994 Summit of theAmericas, sets forth a co-ordinated, multilateral approach to combating money laundering in the hemisphere.
59. It was also reported that the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba recently passed new anti-money laundering legislation which closely tracked the Dutch legal framework. However, the legislation of the Netherlands Antilles is expected to be in force on 1 January 1997.
(iii) Africa
60. Africa remains the region on which the least information is available. FATF members simplylack evidence to suggest that the African nations harbour prominent international money laundering centres. The problems in Africa that have been detected still relate to the operations of Nigerian organised crime groups which engage in a wide range of criminal activity, including some very sophisticated fraud schemes. Other northern African nations have been connected to drug trafficking operations extending into Western Europe, where the proceeds of that activity have circulated back to the drug producing countries. Some members reported a significant amount of money laundering stemming from drug trafficking between African emigre communities in FATF member nations.
(iv) The Former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc
61. Russia and the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc present a troublesome problem for FATF members. In last year’s typologies exercise, experts reported that large volumes of cash were making their way from these countries into member banks and financial institutions. While the experts harboured suspicions that a significant portion of these funds were tied to criminal conduct, however, they expressed frustration at being unable to confirm the criminal ties in most cases.
62. This year, by contrast, the experts presented much more hard evidence that Russian organised crime groups and other illegal enterprises were penetrating legitimate financial channels to launder illgotten wealth.
63. Organised crime in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc is involved in more or less everytype of criminal activity, including drug trafficking, prostitution, trafficking in human beings, financial fraud, extortion, and trade in stolen vehicles. It is also involved in tax fraud schemes and the theft of assets from companies or state enterprises. Russian enterprises in particular have shown themselves to be extremely well managed, with a network of international contacts extending to other international criminal organisations and to emigre communities.
64. Several consistent typologies involving funds from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Blochave been observed. First, experts reported cases in which individuals opened accounts at financial institutions and deposited large amounts of cash tied to interests in Russia and Eastern Europe. Once deposited, the funds were then transferred out of the country. Often these schemes involved the assistance of a lawyer or other middle person. One delegation, for example, detected cases in which Russian money entered the banking system under the cover of solicitors’ client accounts. In another variation of this approach, a delegation reported having a number of cases were individuals exchanged large amounts of currency in banks and then, presumably, returned the money to its criminal owners in the east.
65. Another frequently cited trend involves the establishment of trading or other front companies inFATF countries. Accounts have been established at financial institutions in the names of these companies and moneys transferred to the accounts from accounts in other countries (including offshore financial centres). Often the explanation is that the transferred sums are payments for the export or import of items to and from the former Soviet Union or Eastern Bloc nations.
66. The experts reported a number of factors which suggest that a scheme of this sort is taking place.These include the fact that: 1) transaction activity in the accounts often occurs in amounts greater than that which ordinarily would be expected given the ostensible nature of the account holder’s business; 2) the documentation offered to support transactions appears false or deficient; 3) the account holder has been incorporated or registered to do business for short period; and 4) the parties on both sides of the transactions appear to be related. Again, these schemes often involve a professional money launderer, a lawyer or other citizen of the FATF country that assists in establishing the company, setting up the account and effectuating the transactions.
67. Groups tied to the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc are continuing to make extensive investments in real estate, hotels, restaurants and tourist businesses in a number of Western European countries. The assets are often purchased through offshore companies with the assistance of anintermediary. One delegation reported an attempt by a Russian bank to purchase a member of its stock exchange that was on the brink of bankruptcy. Working through a solicitor, the bank tried to structure the transaction so that it obtained a controlling interest in the firm but did not own enough shares to trigger ownership disclosure requirements.
68. Although the bulk of the money is flowing from east to west, there is evidence that money from crimes committed by Russian gangs in the west is being moved back to Russia. For instance, over the past eighteen months, approximately $ US 100 million in cash has been shipped from the US to Russiaevery day, primarily through two US banks, in response to orders from Russian banks. Given the high levels of currency ordered, it is at least conceivable that some portion of the funds will be used to supply the needs of Russian organised crime, in addition to that which is applied to legitimate ends.
69. Despite mounting evidence that FATF member countries are being affected by organised crime in Russia and other areas of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc, in too many cases the experts are still unable to confirm the criminal nature of funds coming from these countries. Many attribute this problem to a lack of co-operation on the part of law enforcement authorities in the countries where the funds are originating. Wide spread corruption within authorities in Russia and the former Soviet Union is another factor.
70. It was noted that the states of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc possess many features which make a country attractive to money launderers: banking systems that are corrupt or corruptible; no money laundering legislation or an absence of meaningful legislation; the ability to buy or establish a bank with very little capital; law enforcement structures ill-equipped to investigate financial crime; a high propensity for official corruption; a desperate need for capital; disinclination on the part of law enforcement authorities to co-operate with one another. Hence, the potential exists for Russia and other Eastern European countries to become money laundering centres for proceeds of crime generated in the west.
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS
71. Money laundering remains a very serious problem in FATF countries and around the world. The“life blood” of any profit-generating criminal activity, the laundering process allows narcotics traffickers, terrorists, perpetrators of financial fraud, and every other criminal enterprise to perpetuate, and to live lavishly from, their illegal activity. The phenomenon is still a matter of concern even though we are better able to understand it, thanks in significant part to the implementation of the FATF Forty Recommendations.
72. It is difficult at the present time to assess the scale of the money laundering problem. Althoughthe experts generally agree that it amounts to hundreds of billions of dollars annually, they also acknowledge that previous attempts to arrive at a precise estimate have been empirically flawed. Nevertheless, the collective opinion is that developing a methodologically sound measure is a laudable objective and must be pursued.
73. Drug trafficking remains the single largest source of illegal proceeds, although there is general consensus among the experts that non-drug related crime is increasingly significant. Indeed, in somemembers, non-drug related crime is by far the predominant source of illicit funds.
74. Conventional money laundering techniques are still prevalent. Cash smuggling across nationalborders, for example, is a time-honoured ploy that appears to be escalating. The use of bureaux dechange to dispose of criminal proceeds has increased significantly. Professional money launderers areplaying an increasingly active role, facilitating transactions to mask the origin and ownership of tainted funds.
75. In addition to these traditional methods, potential money laundering threats have been identifiedin certain rapidly developing industries. Foremost among these is the emerging cyber payments technology sector. While there is no evidence to suggest that this industry is currently being manipulated by criminal interests, the experts agree that the FATF cannot afford to wait until it happens. The ability to access cyber payments systems to launder illicit profits could seriously undermine the effectiveness of existing anti-money laundering measures. Accordingly, the FATF must be proactive, working with the cyber payments industry to incorporate the necessary safeguards into the design and operation of these products.
76. In the insurance sector, there is an expanding pool of evidence indicating that single premium insurance products are being utilised to hide illegal wealth. Evidence also suggests that the criminal element is moving into the reinsurance industry to capitalise on the lack of effective regulation there.
77. With respect to the securities industry, there is comparatively little proof that large scale money laundering is occurring. Still, the international character of the securities business, and the liquidity and speed of securities transactions, render this sector susceptible to exploitation. It is thus important to continue working with the securities sector to develop a better understanding of any vulnerabilities inherent in this field.
78. Recognising what has become a tautology — that the money laundering problem is not confinedto the proceeds of narcotics activity alone — virtually all FATF members have expanded or are in the process of expanding their money laundering laws to include non-drug related predicate offences. Also,in response to the ever-diversifying nature of the money laundering problem, many members are takingnew steps to apply prevention measures to non-bank financial institutions and non-financial businesses. And members are making the dismantling of money laundering operations easier by removing legal impediments to investigation and prosecution, for instance by easing the burden of proof regarding the illicit origin of funds.
79. The problem of money laundering stemming from the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc isincreasingly acute. There is an expanding body of evidence indicating that organised crime groups in those countries are seeking access to the financial systems of FATF members, often with the assistance of intermediaries based in member countries. There also appears to be a significant amount of capital flowing back from FATF members to interests in the east. The problem of establishing the criminal source of suspicious funds continues to plague law enforcement authorities. This problem is due in some degree to a lack of co-operation from law enforcement counterparts in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc.
28 June 1996
FinCEN Advisory is a product of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury, Post Office Box 39, Vienna, Virginia 22183. For more information about FinCEN’s programs, visit the FinCEN web site at https://www.fincen.gov. General questions or comments regarding FinCEN publications should be addressed to the Office of Communications, FinCEN, (703) 905-3773. Information may also be faxed to (703) 905-3885.



Content


PDF

futures_guidance_06072006.pdf68.25 KB


FIN-2006-G011

Issued Date
June 07, 2006



Guidance Subject
Application of the Regulations Requiring Special Due Diligence Programs for Certain Foreign Accounts to Certain Introduced Accounts and Give-Up Arrangements in the Futures Industries

The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is issuing this guidance to clarify the obligations of futures commission merchants subject to the final due diligence rules implementing section 312 of the USA PATRIOT Act (the “section 312 rules”).1 Specifically, this guidance addresses (1) how accounts introduced by introducing brokers in commodities to futures commission merchants should be treated for the purposes of complying with the due diligence rule for correspondent accounts for foreign financial institutions2 (the “correspondent account rule”) and the due diligence rule for private banking accounts3 (the “private banking rule”) and (2) how the correspondent account rule applies to futures commission merchants operating in give-up arrangements.
1. Application of the Section 312 Rules to Certain Introduced Accounts An introducing broker in commodities (“introducing broker”) solicits or accepts orders from the public for the purchase or sale of commodity futures contracts.4 However, an introducing broker may not accept money, securities, or other property for the purpose of margining, guaranteeing, or securing solicited or accepted trades or contracts.5 To conduct its business, an introducing broker will enter into an agreement with a futures commission merchant,6 under which the introducing broker will introduce customers to the futures commission merchant.7 The introduced customer will establish an account directly with the futures commission merchant, in which the futures commission merchant will clear and carry the introduced customer’s commodity futures trades until they are offset or settled. We have been asked to clarify the obligations of the futures commission merchant under the section 312 rules.
A. The Correspondent Account RuleTypically, an introducing broker – and not a futures commission merchant – will solicit orders from an introduced account.8 However, a futures commission merchant will execute an account agreement directly with an introduced foreign financial institution so that it can accept money, securities, or other property to margin, guarantee, or secure trades or contracts cleared and carried for the foreign financial institution. The execution of the account agreement by a futures commission merchant establishes a “formal relationship” with the introduced foreign financial institution, subjecting the futures commission merchant to compliance with the due diligence provisions of the correspondent account rule.9
An introducing broker may not accept money, securities, or other property for the purpose of margining, guaranteeing, or securing solicited or accepted trades or contracts,10 and we do not view the solicitation or acceptance of orders for the purchase or sale of commodity futures contracts alone as constituting the establishment, maintenance, administration, or management of a correspondent account for a foreign financial institution that would subject an introducing broker to compliance with the due diligence provisions of the correspondent account rule.11 However, an introducing broker may administer or manage a correspondent account for a foreign financial institution by offering and performing services for the foreign financial institution beyond the solicitation or acceptance of orders, which would subject the introducing broker to the due diligence provisions of the correspondent account rule.
We caution that this clarification should not be interpreted as limiting the anti-money laundering obligations of an introducing broker under our rules. An introducing broker’s anti-money laundering program should contain risk-based policies, procedures, and controls for assessing the money laundering risk posed by customers, including foreign financial institutions; for monitoring and mitigating that risk; and for detecting and reporting suspicious activity attempted or conducted through the introducing broker.12
B. The Private Banking RuleIn the preamble to the section 312 rules, we described how introducing and clearing firms in the securities and futures industries may apportion due diligence functions for the purposes of complying with the private banking rule.13 We have been asked to clarify whether we meant to require futures commission merchants to perform due diligence on introduced private banking accounts pursuant to the private banking rule.14 We did not intend such a requirement in all instances. When a futures commission merchant imposes minimum aggregate account requirements on an introduced account for a non-U.S. person and additionally assigns an officer, employee, or agent to act as a liaison between the futures commission merchant and the beneficial owner or owners of the introduced account,15 then the introduced account will be considered a private banking account of the futures commission merchant, subjecting the futures commission merchant to compliance with the due diligence provisions of the private banking rule.16
The imposition of minimum aggregate account requirements on an introduced account by a guaranteed introducing broker,17 and the assignment of a liaison to the introduced account, will subject both the guaranteed introducing broker and the futures commission merchant to the due diligence provisions of the private banking rule. A similar conclusion may be reached with respect to independent introducing brokers, depending on the nature of the relationship between the introducing broker and the futures commission merchant.
2. Application of the Correspondent Account Rule to Futures Commission Merchants in Give-up ArrangementsA give-up arrangement occurs when a futures market participant uses one entity, a futures commission merchant, as its “carrying broker” and uses one or more other entities, frequently a futures commission merchant, as its “executing broker.”18 An executing broker will direct any trades it executes on order of a futures market participant to the account the market participant has established with its carrying broker, pursuant to the give-up arrangement. We have been asked to clarify how the correspondent account rule applies to futures commission merchants acting as carrying brokers and executing brokers in give-up arrangements.
Although an executing broker in a give-up arrangement will facilitate trades for a market participant, and the give-up arrangement may be formalized by a written agreement,19 the give-up arrangement essentially serves as an order acceptance, trade routing, and compensation protocol among the executing broker, the market participant, and its carrying broker.20 Indeed, only the carrying broker accepts money, securities, or other property from the market participant for the purpose of margining, guaranteeing, or securing its trades, and only the carrying broker executes account-opening documents with the market participant to clear and carry its executed trades until they are offset or settled.21 Accordingly, a futures commission merchant operating as the carrying broker in a give-up arrangement – and not a futures commission merchant operating as an executing broker – is subject to compliance with the due diligence provisions of the correspondent account rule.22
We caution that this interpretation should not be construed as limiting the anti-money laundering obligations of futures commission merchants under our rules. The anti-money laundering program of a futures commission merchant should contain risk-based policies, procedures, and controls for assessing the money laundering risk posed by its operations, including the executing brokerage activities of the futures commission merchant; for monitoring and mitigating that risk; and for detecting and reporting suspicious activity attempted or conducted through the futures commission merchant.23
1 The due diligence provisions of the section 312 rules apply to “[a] futures commission merchant or introducing broker registered, or required to be registered, with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission under the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1 et seq.), except persons who register pursuant to section 4(f)(a)(2) of the Commodity Exchange Act,” among other covered financial institutions. 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(f)(ix).
2 31 C.F.R. § 103.176.
3 31 C.F.R. § 103.178.
4 See 7 U.S.C. 1a(23) (defining “introducing broker”).
5 Compare 7 U.S.C. 1a(23) and 7 U.S.C. 1a(20) (defining “futures commission merchant”).
6 7 U.S.C. 1a(20).
7 The agreement between an introducing broker and a futures commission merchant will establish terms for the introduction of accounts to the futures commission merchant, such as compensation arrangements, the ability of an introducing broker to use the futures commission merchant’s name in sales literature and, if applicable, how the introducing broker should place orders.
8 Arrangements between introducing brokers and futures commission merchants also exist whereby the introducing broker will not engage in transactional activity after the introduction of an account to a futures commission merchant. In such circumstances, the futures commission merchant will solicit and accept trades from the account and will pay the introducing broker a trailing commission. The existence of such a relationship does not alter our conclusions.
9 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(d)(1)(i) and (d)(2)(iii). See also 31 C.F.R. § 103.176(a) (“[a] covered financial institution shall establish a due diligence program . . . designed to enable the covered financial institution to detect and report . . . any known or suspected money laundering activity conducted through or involving any correspondent account established, maintained, administered, or managed by such covered financial institution in the United States for a foreign financial institution”).
10 See supra note 5.
11 See also 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(d)(2)(iii) (emphasis added) (for the purposes of the correspondent account rule, the term “account” is defined as “any formal relationship established by a futures commission merchant to provide regular services, including, but not limited to, those established to effect transactions in contracts of sale of a commodity for future delivery, options on any contract of sale of a commodity for future delivery, or options on a commodity”).
12 See 31 C.F.R. § 103.120(c) (anti-money laundering program requirements for futures commission merchants and introducing brokers) and 31 C.F.R. § 103.17(a)(2) (suspicious activity reporting requirements for futures commission merchants and introducing brokers).
13 In the preamble at footnote 68, we stated that “where [introducing and clearing firms in the securities and futures industries] maintain a private banking account for a customer . . . [a]ny apportionment of [due diligence] functions between such entities should include adequate sharing of information to ensure that each institution can satisfy its obligations under this rule. For example, an introducing firm would be responsible for informing the clearing firm of the customers holding private banking accounts and for obtaining the necessary information from and about these customers, while both firms would be responsible for establishing adequate controls to detect suspicious activity.” Final Rules, 71 Fed. Reg. at 508.
14 See also Application of the Regulations Requiring Special Due Diligence Programs for Certain Foreign Accounts to the Securities and Futures Industries, FIN-2006-G009 at Section 3 (May 10, 2006), at https://www.fincen.gov/reg_guidance.html.
15 A “private banking account” is defined as “an account (or any combination of accounts) . . . maintained at a covered financial institution that . . . requires a minimum aggregate deposit of funds or other assets of not less than $1,000,000 . . . [i]s established on behalf of or for the benefit of one or more non-U.S. persons who are direct or beneficial owners of the account [and is] assigned to, or is administered or managed by, in whole or in part, an officer, employee, or agent of a covered financial institution acting as a liaison between the covered financial institution and the direct beneficial owner of the account.” 31 C.F.R. § 103.175(o).
16 31 C.F.R. § 103.178.
17 Introducing brokers may be “independent” or “guaranteed.” Independent introducing brokers are subject to minimum net capital requirements established by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and may introduce accounts to one or more futures commission merchants. See 17 C.F.R. § 1.17(a)(1)(iii) (minimum net capital requirements for introducing brokers). Guaranteed introducing brokers have no minimum net capital requirements and may introduce accounts only to one futures commission merchant. See 17 C.F.R. § 1.17(a)(2)(ii) (minimum net capital requirements not applicable to an introducing broker operating pursuant to a written, binding guarantee agreement with a futures commission merchant that meets minimum requirements established by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission at 17 C.F.R. § 1.10(j)).
18 An executing broker in a give-up arrangement may be a futures commission merchant or a floor broker. See 7 U.S.C. 1a(16) (defining “floor broker”).
19 The market participant, the executing broker, the carrying broker, and the market participant’s advisor, if any, may enter into a written agreement specifying their rights and responsibilities, but there is no regulatory obligation to do so. See, e.g., International Uniform Brokerage Execution Services (“Give-up”) Agreement, available at http://www.futuresindustry.org/downloads/regulatory/intlgu1.pdf.
20 A give-up arrangement may include four parties rather than three parties. See id. We would reach the same conclusions with respect to executing and carrying brokers operating in four-party give-up arrangements.
21 See 31 C.F.R. §§ 103.175(d)(1)(i) and (d)(2)(iii). The executing broker will not accept money, securities, or property for the purpose of margining, guaranteeing, or securing trades it executes for a market participant. Rather, the executing broker will direct any trades it executes for the market participant to the market participant’s account at its carrying broker. Thus, the executing broker serves in substantially the same role as an introducing broker in situations where an introducing broker solicits orders from an introduced account at a futures commission merchant. See supra Section 1.A
.22 In the event that a market participant’s carrying broker does not accept an order transmitted to it, the executing broker – if it is a futures commission merchant – then may execute account-opening documents with the market participant for the purpose of clearing and carrying the executed trade for the market participant. At the time it executes account-opening documents with the market participant, the executing broker will become a carrying broker, subjecting it to compliance with the due diligence provisions of the correspondent account rule.
23 See supra note 12.

Financial Institution

Securities and Futures




Content
