Content



Contact
Office of Strategic Communications, 703-905-3770


Immediate Release
January 15, 2021




WASHINGTON—The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today announced that Capital One, National Association (Capital One) has been assessed a $390,000,000 civil money penalty for engaging in both willful and negligent violations of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and its implementing regulations.  
Specifically, FinCEN determined and Capital One admitted to willfully failing to implement and maintain an effective Anti-Money Laundering (AML) program to guard against money laundering.  Capital One also admitted that it willfully failed to file thousands of suspicious activity reports (SARs), and negligently failed to file thousands of Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs), with respect to a particular business unit known as the Check Cashing Group.  The violations occurred from at least 2008 through 2014, and caused millions of dollars in suspicious transactions to go unreported in a timely and accurate manner, including proceeds connected to organized crime, tax evasion, fraud, and other financial crimes laundered through the bank into the U.S. financial system.  As stated in the Assessment of Civil Money Penalty, Capital One admitted to the facts set forth by FinCEN and acknowledged that its conduct violated the BSA and regulations codified at 31 C.F.R. Chapter X. 
“The failures outlined in this enforcement action are egregious,” said FinCEN’s Director Kenneth A. Blanco.  “Capital One willfully disregarded its obligations under the law in a high-risk business unit.  Information received from financial institutions through the Bank Secrecy Act plays a critical role in protecting our national security, and depriving law enforcement of this information puts our nation and our people at risk.  Capital One’s failures did just that.  Capital One’s egregious failures allowed known criminals to use and abuse our nation’s financial system unchecked, fostering criminal activity and allowing it to continue and flourish at the expense of victims and other citizens.  These kinds of failures by financial institutions, regardless of their size and believed influence, will not be tolerated.  Today’s action should serve as a reminder to other financial institutions that FinCEN is committed to protecting our national security and the American people from harm and we will bring appropriate enforcement actions where we identify violations.”
As outlined in the Assessment, in 2008, after Capital One acquired several other regional banks, Capital One established the Check Cashing Group as a business unit within its commercial bank.  The group was comprised of between approximately 90 and 150 check cashers in the New York- and New Jersey-area.  Capital One provided banking services to the Check Cashing Group, including providing armored car cash shipments and processing checks deposited by Check Cashing Group customers.  During the course of establishing the Check Cashing Group and banking these customers, Capital One was aware of several compliance and money laundering risks associated with banking this particular group, including warnings by regulators, criminal charges against some of the customers, and internal assessments that ranked most of the customers in the top 100 of the bank’s highest risk customers for money laundering.  
Despite the warnings and internal assessments, Capital One willfully failed to implement and maintain an effective AML program in many ways.  Capital One’s process for investigating suspicious transactions was weak and resulted in the failure to fully investigate and report suspicious activity to FinCEN.  Capital One often failed to detect and report suspicious activity by the check cashers themselves, even as it detected and reported activity by the check casher’s customers.  And Capital One’s implementation of a specialized report to provide insight into larger checks cashed by the Check Cashing Group customers’ customers (the check cashers’ patrons) failed to properly connect and report suspicious banking activity by certain check cashers.
Capital One also acknowledged failing to file SARs even when it had actual knowledge of criminal charges against specific customers, including Domenick Pucillo, a convicted associate of the Genovese organized crime family.  Pucillo was one of the largest check cashers in the New York-New Jersey area, and one of the highest-risk Check Cashing Group customers.  Capital One was made aware of Pucillo’s participation in potential criminal activity and other risks on several occasions, including learning in early 2013 about potential criminal charges in two different jurisdictions.  Despite this information, Capital One failed to timely file SARs on suspicious activity by Pucillo’s check cashing businesses, and continued to process over 20,000 transactions valued at approximately $160 million, including cash withdrawals, for Pucillo’s businesses.  According to public sources, in May 2019 Pucillo pleaded guilty to conspiring to commit money laundering in connection with loan sharking and illegal gambling proceeds that flowed through his Capital One accounts.  
Capital One also admitted to negligently failing to file CTRs on approximately 50,000 reportable cash transactions representing over $16 billion in cash handled by its Check Cashing Group customers.  Specifically, Capital One utilized an internal system that assigned a “cash” code for customer withdrawals to trigger CTR filings.  In designing its system, Capital One failed to assign this “cash” code to armored car cash shipments for a number of Check Cashing Group customers.  Accordingly, these transactions were not identified as customer cash withdrawals and were not reported to FinCEN through Capital One’s CTR reporting systems.  
In determining the final amount of the civil money penalty, FinCEN considered Capital One’s significant remediation and cooperation with FinCEN’s investigation.  In addition to exiting the Check Cashing Group and taking specific remedial efforts related to its SAR and CTR filing systems, Capital One has made significant investments in and improvements to its AML program over the past several years.  The bank also provided FinCEN with voluminous and well-organized documents, made several presentations of its findings, and signed several agreements tolling the statute of limitations during this investigation.  FinCEN strongly encourages financial institutions and other businesses and individuals subject to the BSA to self-disclose any violations of FinCEN’s regulations and cooperate with its enforcement investigations.  
The mission of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering and its related crimes including terrorism, and promote national security through the strategic use of financial authorities and the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence.


Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content



Contact
Office of Strategic Communications, 703-905-3770



Immediate Release
March 04, 2020




WASHINGTON—The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has assessed a $450,000 civil money penalty against Michael LaFontaine, former Chief Operational Risk Officer at U.S. Bank National Association (U.S. Bank), for his failure to prevent violations of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) during his tenure.  U.S. Bank used automated transaction monitoring software to spot potentially suspicious activity, but it improperly capped the number of alerts generated, limiting the ability of law enforcement to target criminal activity.  In addition, the bank failed to staff the BSA compliance function with enough people to review even the reduced number of alerts enabling criminals to escape detection. 
“Mr. LaFontaine was warned by his subordinates and by regulators that capping the number of alerts was dangerous and ill-advised.  His actions prevented the proper filing of many, many SARs, which hindered law enforcement’s ability to fully combat crimes and protect people,” said FinCEN Director Kenneth A. Blanco.  “FinCEN encourages technological innovations to help fight money laundering, but technology must be used properly.”  
In February 2018, FinCEN, in coordination with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the U.S. Department of Justice, issued a $185 million civil money penalty against U.S. Bank for, among other things, willfully violating the BSA’s requirements to implement and maintain an effective anti-money laundering (AML) program and to file Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) in a timely manner.
Mr. LaFontaine was advised by two subordinates that they believed the existing automated system was inadequate because caps were set to limit the number of alerts.  The OCC warned U.S. Bank on several occasions that using numerical caps to limit the Bank’s monitoring programs based on the size of its staff and available resources could result in a potential enforcement action, and FinCEN had taken previous public actions against banks for the same activity. 
Mr. LaFontaine received internal memos from staff claiming that significant increases in SAR volumes, law enforcement inquiries, and closure recommendations, created a situation where the AML staff “is stretched dangerously thin.”  Mr. LaFontaine failed to take sufficient action when presented with significant AML program deficiencies in the Bank’s SAR-monitoring system and the number of staff to fulfill the AML compliance role.  The Bank had maintained inappropriate alert caps for at least five years.
FinCEN has coordinated this action with the OCC and appreciates the assistance it provided.
The mission of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use, combat money laundering, and promote national security through the strategic use of financial authorities and the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence.


Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content


September 11, 2019



 
 
 
 
Thank you, Rick, for the introduction, and on behalf of FinCEN Director Kenneth A. Blanco and the other 290 staff at FinCEN, I want to thank you again for making FinCEN a part of MTRA’s annual conference.
I am going to try and keep my remarks brief today to allow time for questions, so I will focus on the following topics:
I want to speak about innovation and reform as it pertains to the Bank Secrecy Act and its implementation. 
I want to highlight the importance of supervision in the non-bank financial institution (NBFI) sector, as well as the importance of continued close coordination with our counterparts in this room, the state supervisors.
Finally, I want to talk to you about the importance of a strong culture of compliance and what it means in a national and global security context. 
 
Innovation and Regulatory Reform
Innovation and regulatory reform are topics of much discussion in Washington these days. From FinCEN’s perspective, our BSA/AML system is good; but it can always be improved, and we see great opportunities in working with industry on innovations that can help better detect and safeguard against illicit activity. In focusing on innovation, we want to examine how we can focus more industry and government resources on priority areas of national security and high value illicit crimes.
Some might argue that innovation in a highly regulated environment is antithetical. Something new is something less known, and something less known usually creates fear, both for the regulated and the regulator. As a regulator with an interest in helping the private sector better identify and report illicit activity, FinCEN is striving to pave the way for more innovation and to remove some of that fear. 
To do this it is important that we send a clear message that we are in fact actually encouraging innovation in the AML space.
In December, FinCEN, along with the federal banking agencies, issued a policy statement encouraging innovation in the banking sector. The statement notes that innovative pilot programs in and of themselves should not subject banks to supervisory criticism, even if the pilot programs ultimately prove unsuccessful. Likewise, pilot programs that expose gaps in anti-money laundering compliance programs will not necessarily result in supervisory action with respect to that program. This was a simple statement, yet it was very welcome news to the banking sector, and FinCEN is taking it very much to heart when engaging with industry about new ways in which financial institutions want to improve their AML programs. 
FinCEN is concerned with more than just banks, of course. Of particular note to many of you here today, is the fact that there are many actors in the emerging technology space, some of which FinCEN may not yet regulate, that are pushing new innovations and new ways to collect and use information in the fight against crime. In light of this, a few months ago, FinCEN launched its “Innovation Hours Program,” encouraging FinTech and RegTech companies as well as financial institutions to present to FinCEN new and innovative products and services for potential use in the financial sector. 
At our first meeting in July, we heard from several companies developing different products using machine learning and other forms of augmented/artificial intelligence. Despite the variations in the products, there were some general themes that emerged from the discussions:
1) The potential for these products to help more efficiently identify and prioritize information while reducing false positives to assist human analysis; 
2) The importance of training and feedback for these systems to make them more effective; and 
3) The potential roles that government actors can play in those training and feedback efforts.
Our second meeting, held in August, included briefings from companies providing a wide variety of blockchain-related services as well as products focused on providing greater transparency to financial and other activity. Among the themes that emerged from those discussions were: 
The potential for better understanding and addressing the risks associated with virtual currency activity and entities; and 
The ability to use blockchain technology to enhance rather than decrease transparency, including through the understanding of customer identity or transactional profiles. 
Our September meeting will include presentations and demonstrations related to innovations in KYC, BSA reporting, and core inter-bank payment and messaging systems associated with industry AML/CFT efforts.
Our goal here is to provide an environment in which FinCEN can better understand innovation as it happens and provide insight or other regulatory action to ensure that innovation and compliance with FinCEN’s regulations—and promotion of anti-money laundering goals more generally—can go hand in hand. I encourage both the industry and government participants here today to go to FinCEN’s Innovation page on our website to see how we have laid out this program and how you can become engaged.  
Promoting innovation in the FinTech and RegTech context is only one aspect of reform in the anti-money laundering arena. Other areas where we are focusing our attention include:
Working with our supervisory partners to review the examination practices for the BSA for the purpose of ensuring that examinations are sufficiently focused on effectiveness of anti-money laundering efforts in addition to technical compliance with the regulations;
Working with law enforcement to better communicate priorities that allow financial institutions to better allocate resources to be more impactful and efficient;
Continuing to promote the expansion of information sharing, both between government and industry and between and among financial institutions themselves, as a means of making our efforts more effective; and
Understanding and documenting all the ways in which BSA information has value so that we can assess potential changes in our requirements based on quantifiable metrics.
 
NBFI Supervision
            While the intensity of our efforts with respect to innovation and reg reform have increased over the past couple of years, our commitment to enhance supervision of NBFIs has been steady for several years. FinCEN is actively prioritizing and engaging in a number of activities with respect to NBFIs. These include:
1) conducting more FinCEN-led examinations of specialized, rapidly evolving financial services providers such as virtual currency exchangers and administrators; 
2) working closely with regulatory and industry partners, domestically and internationally, to identify and collate sources of valuable sector data that can bolster our analytical endeavors; and
3) procuring the resources and capabilities to develop a stronger framework for risk-assessing the sector from both the compliance and illicit activity standpoints. 
By joining forces with state and federal examiners in the field, FinCEN is better positioned to make intelligence and experience-derived contributions to the examination process and the ultimate assessment of the risk posed to the U.S. financial system by potential findings of non-compliance.
By intentionally and regularly partnering with our foreign counterparts in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—jurisdictions that have similar regulatory frameworks—we are able to exchange supervisory expertise and experiences and collaborate to identify and develop solutions to common supervisory challenges in this sector, which lends itself to a more cohesive supervision of transnational entities.
By leveraging our statutory authorities and strong working relationships with other stakeholders, we are able to collect and strategically use various types of data—geographical, operational, and transactional—in order to track compliance trends and vulnerabilities within the NBFI sector and to better inform our AML/CFT efforts. 
Of late, all of these efforts have become particularly important in the virtual currency space, where FinCEN has made it very clear how BSA/AML applies to any activities touching the U.S. financial system. We are seeing a number of new virtual currencies being planned, some in connection with pre-existing social media or messaging platforms. All actors in this space should know that they need to address AML and CFT issues now, not later. And that any operations that they begin should be in compliance with our rules at the start. 
Coordinating and working closely with state regulators during our ongoing investigations has proven to be immensely helpful in guiding case dispositions. With MSBs in particular, the states have intimate knowledge of industry’s historical operations and compliance trends and have provided a wealth of information to support and augment our evidentiary and examination files. 
States continue to actively monitor their licensed entities and conduct regular periodic reviews of compliance that supplements and compliments FinCEN’s work. We also appreciate the efforts the states are making to consolidate and streamline their supervision efforts in this industry. So, for the state regulators sitting in this room, know that our work with you is a continued priority for FinCEN and that I look forward to continue strengthening supervision and confidence in this area.  
We have also continued our support of industry efforts to develop best practices for MSBs, facilitating consultations with supervisors, law enforcement, and depository institutions. Many of the people and associations in this room contributed to these best practices. I looked at a recent draft of this effort, and understand that the best practices are close to being finalized, at which point they will likely be published jointly by relevant industry trade associations. 
Significant effort has gone into what I consider a thoughtful and comprehensive product that should be welcomed by the MSB industry and those that work with it, whether banks, auditors, or regulators. The document details best practices for the industry covering topics such as adhering to various MSB BSA program obligations, reporting requirements, state licensing requirements, principal oversight with respect to agents, and certain compliance certification requirements. 
It is part of a long term effort to increase transparency and trust between the MSB sector and other financial institutions, as well as their regulators. I encourage all of you to review the industry-driven best practices document once it is published shortly.
 
Culture of Compliance 
Today is September 11, and it is the first time that I have been asked to speak on this anniversary. My daughter turns 18 today, and it’s hard to believe that as of today we now have adults whose entire lives have been lived in a post 9/11 context. Whether you are a regulator or a member of the financial sector, you have spent a considerable amount of time working on ways to make our country more secure in the aftermath of that day. I want to close my remarks by focusing on one aspect of that effort, which—while crucially important—is sometimes overlooked within the context of national security:  it is what we refer to as a culture of compliance. 
About five years ago, FinCEN first provided some additional focus on the importance of an institution’s culture when it comes to anti-money laundering safeguards and reporting. The following principles were highlighted in FinCEN’s 2014 Guidance on establishing a Culture of Compliance: 
Financial Institution Leadership Should Be Engaged
Compliance Should Not Be Compromised By Revenue Interests
Information Should Be Shared Throughout the Organization
Leadership Should Provide Adequate Human and Technological Resources
The Program Should Be Effective and Tested By an Independent and Competent Party
Leadership and Staff Should Understand How BSA Reports are Used 
Much of what we list in our notions of a culture of compliance is based on years of experience working with our U.S. financial institutions, and is rooted in common understandings of how businesses work here within the context of our own financial and legal system. It is not just understanding the Bank Secrecy Act that underpins a culture of compliance. It is also understanding the broader culture of compliance that we are fortunate to have here in the United States. It is based on things that we all grow up understanding: 
The belief that individuals can make a difference
The notion that “if you see something, you say something”
Notions of workplace protections and accountability
Respect for the rule of law
The ability to question authority
Belief in our judicial system
The belief that law enforcement protects people, rather than subjugates them
The understanding that no system is perfect, and that we can always work to make our system better
All of these concepts and more—things that we sometimes take for granted—underpin what FinCEN calls a culture of compliance. 
Institutions operating in different environments globally may not have the same underpinning that we have. For example, we say, “If you see something, say something,” but we have to acknowledge that there are places in the world where that is not the norm. People in many jurisdictions may do the opposite because “saying something” gets them in trouble or puts them in danger. There are places with less distinction between public- and private-sector activity or between sovereign and private-sector wealth. 
These differences can have an impact on the comfort levels of financial institutions that are supposed to be reporting suspicious transactions to their jurisdiction’s equivalent of FinCEN. And there are places where there is simply less trust between government and the people or less of a view that government is the servant of the people. 
So, in places with such different environments how can we talk about a culture of compliance? We have money transmitters here whose operations span the globe. How does what we talk about here with respect to a culture of compliance get translated in other jurisdictions? Does it get discussed? As we work together to create a global financial system with greater resilience to illicit activity, it is important for us to discuss how promoting a culture of compliance in the anti-money laundering context can work to the benefit of institutions outside of the United States. 
It is also important for FinCEN and other regulators to raise this with our global counterparts. No system is perfect. In the United States we continue to look for ways in which we can improve how our financial sector and law enforcement can work together to combat illicit activity. But in this space, as in others, we have the opportunity to lead by example. 
When we are engaging with our counterparts overseas, we need to talk about the concept of a culture of compliance in the United States and what underpins it, and explore with our counterparts concepts that could underpin a culture of compliance in their own jurisdictions. All businesses need to be concerned about their reputations. And business professionals everywhere need to be concerned about their personal reputations. Reputational risk, personal honor, institutional pride, national pride—those are potentially some building blocks to work with in other jurisdictions that may not have the same underpinnings as those that support our own notion of a culture of compliance. 
Focusing on anti-money laundering and adopting an anti-money laundering culture can have positive effects on other aspects of a business’s operations. So, we need to talk to our overseas colleagues about the benefits of a strong culture of compliance.
And we also need to talk to them about the risks that they run within their institutions and their jurisdictions if an anti-money laundering compliance culture is not fostered. Much is at stake when a business anywhere puts its reputation at risk. As we get better about sharing information between and among mindful governments and mindful industry actors, those that are less mindful about identifying and thwarting illicit activity will stick out. 
I will end by sharing a story about a conversation that had a big impact on me. As part of my job, I sometimes visit other countries. One time I was in a jurisdiction that was considered to be rife with corruption at all levels. I had the opportunity to meet with bankers, government officials, and others. At a meeting with members of some non-governmental organizations, we talked candidly about the levels of corruption that people dealt with and whether and how they might address it. 
One person told me it was what they had grown up with, a way of life, the only thing they knew. I asked that person, ‘if it is what everyone grows up with, at what age in a child’s life does a parent have to explain what corruption is and why it’s accepted?’ In other words, when does a child typically witness their first shakedown or need to bribe someone and ask their parents about it? After reflecting for a few moments, the person, from personal experience, said it was when children were around 8 years old. I suggested that maybe a way to begin to break the cycle of corruption was to get public officials and community leaders to focus on that fact—having to have such conversations with their children at such a young age. Maybe engaging in a discourse on those conversations could help trigger some change.
After that, I came home and reflected on our system here. We raise our children in an environment where we generally do not have to have that discussion. No system is perfect and, yes, we have to talk to our children about several injustices—some that are addressed and some that have yet to be addressed. But we don’t have to have conversations about endemic corruption, particularly at such a young age, because we have a system both in the government and the private sector that is pretty good at identifying and thwarting corruption. 
My daughter, 18 years old today, grew up in a place where we have faith in our system. We can have faith in our financial sector in particular and the efforts it takes to protect its integrity. We all benefit from relationships between and among the private sector and government that are instrumental in fighting corruption and other illicit activity. Don’t take it for granted. Be thankful. And be proud. Know that what you do really matters and plays a huge part in our country’s success and security.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you all and I look forward to our discussion. 
 ###



Content


August 13, 2019



 
 
12th Annual Las Vegas Anti-Money Laundering Conference
Las Vegas, Nevada
 
Introduction
Thank you for that wonderful introduction, Greg.
Good morning, everyone. I am delighted to be here today to address the 12th Annual Las Vegas Anti-Money Laundering Conference. 
Thank you for having me. And thank you so much, Mindy, for inviting FinCEN to be a part of this year’s event—it provides another great opportunity to share with you what we at FinCEN are thinking, and to hear from all of you and get your perspective and thoughts—that is critical for our mission. 
I would like to spend our time together this morning discussing a number of topics that I hope will be meaningful to all of you, and help set the stage for further discussions while you are here:

First, I will share my perspective on how new technologies are impacting AML/CFT and financial crime detection, particularly sports betting and mobile gaming;


Second, I will discuss how FinCEN’s recent guidance on Convertible Virtual Currency is something that casinos need to pay attention to;


Third, I will revisit the importance of a strong culture of compliance within casinos; and


Lastly, I will provide an overview of our ongoing work related to regulatory reform, innovation, and BSA value.

 
The Impact of Advanced Technologies
Casinos and card clubs know as well as any financial institution the important role technology can play in detecting and reporting financial crimes. 
Indeed, they have explicit pillars in their AML program rule requiring the use of all available information and automated data processing systems to aid in ensuring compliance with the BSA.
Over the past several years, we have talked extensively about the “all available information” pillar at events such as this one, as well as in some of the enforcement actions we have taken.
Let me also address the “automated systems” pillar and describe some developments and considerations that impact your casino or card club’s operations.
 
Sports Betting and Mobile Gaming
With last year’s Supreme Court decision legalizing sports betting, it’s important for casinos and card clubs to consider how to integrate sports betting programs into their existing AML programs. 
Sports betting, and other mobile gaming services run through your casino, are no different than other products and services. 
FinCEN expects that your casino or card club is monitoring your sports betting programs for potentially suspicious activity. This includes offering sports betting through a mobile app. 
Whether or not sports betting is offered on or off-premise, your AML obligations are the same. Not only that, we expect your SAR reporting will include cyber-related indicators collected through the use of mobile gaming or betting applications. 
You must establish and implement procedures for using all available information to detect and report suspicious transactions, or suspicious patterns of transactions, that occur through mobile sports applications. 
We recently updated the SAR form to have fields allowing you to report cyber-indicators ranging from source and destination information, file information, subject user names, system modifications, and account information. 
FinCEN issued FAQs in 2016 to assist financial institutions in reporting such cyber indicators and cyber-enabled financial crime, and they are available on our website. This is an area you can expect your examiners to ask about.
 
Relevance of Convertible Virtual Currency (CVC) Advisory to Casinos
Last year, when I spoke to this group I highlighted some of the work FinCEN is doing with respect to cybersecurity and emerging payments; there have been substantial developments over the past year, so I want to mention some of them. 
In May of this year, FinCEN issued guidance on how regulations relating to money services businesses (MSBs) apply to certain business models involving money transmission denominated in value that substitutes for currency, specifically, convertible virtual currencies (CVCs).
The guidance does not establish any new regulatory expectations or requirements. Rather, it consolidates current FinCEN regulations, and related administrative rulings and guidance issued since 2011, and then applies these rules and interpretations to other common business models involving CVC engaging in the same underlying patterns of activity. 
This guidance is intended to help financial institutions comply with the BSA in light of current and emerging business models involving CVC. 
The guidance describes FinCEN’s existing regulatory approach to the issues most frequently raised by industry, law enforcement, and other regulatory bodies within this evolving financial environment.
There are generally two areas where CVC will intersect with casinos and card clubs: so-called CVC casinos on the internet, and physical casinos and card clubs that accept CVC for gaming.
There are two conditions that must be met for a financial institution to be considered a casino or card club: 
(1) it must be duly licensed or authorized to do business as such in the United States, whether under the laws of a State or a Territory or Insular Possession of the United States, or under the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act or other Federal, State, or tribal law or arrangement affecting tribal land, and, 
(2) it must have a gross annual gaming revenue in excess of $1 million. That $1 million can be denominated in US dollars, CVC, or other value. 
These distinctions are important because, as our May CVC guidance points out, internet gaming sites that operate online but that are not duly licensed or authorized to do business as casinos in the United States are not “casinos” for purposes of regulations implementing the BSA. Rather, it is likely they are operating as money transmitters.
Money transmitters have their own obligations under the BSA and its implementing regulations, which includes a formal registration with FinCEN. This applies equally to domestic money transmitters and to foreign-located money transmitters that do business wholly or in substantial part within the United States. 
For casinos and card clubs accepting CVC from customers either on location or through your mobile applications, you need to ensure that this is accounted for in your policies, procedures, and internal controls—as well as your risk assessments. You should also consider how you will review and conduct due diligence on transactions in CVC. How will you conduct blockchain analytics to determine the source of the CVC? How will you incorporate CVC-related indicators into your SAR filings as appropriate?
FinCEN has provided additional assistance on certain illicit activity involving CVC through an advisory we issued on the same day as our guidance. 
This advisory assists financial institutions in identifying and reporting suspicious activity related to criminal exploitation of CVCs for money laundering, sanctions evasion, and other illicit financing purposes. The advisory highlights prominent typologies, associated “red flags,” and identifies information that would be most valuable to law enforcement if contained in suspicious activity reports. This advisory is not aimed only at depository institutions or MSBs; it has material that is important for casinos and card clubs as well. 
One area of concern is that we appear to have a gap in reporting in this area by casinos. While FinCEN has received some filings from casinos regarding cyber-enabled crimes, CVC-related SAR filings by casinos have not been as robust as expected since the May CVC guidance and advisory were published.
I encourage casinos to closely review both documents on FinCEN’s website to see how we are addressing this industry and its interactions with others in the financial sector. Casinos should be filing SARs when they encounter suspicious CVC activity and any cyber events that affect, facilitate, or conduct transactions. We know that casinos are targets for cyber and cyber-enabled criminal activity such as ransomware attacks and business e-mail compromise schemes.
 
Culture of Compliance
This feeds into the concept of having a strong “culture of compliance,” which I know is not something new to casinos or card clubs. It is a theme we have reiterated in our speeches, enforcement actions, and advisories issued since 2014. So it concerns me when I hear about some compliance budgets being cut by casinos looking to trim costs and retain gamblers. 
To be clear—we take the culture of compliance seriously. This is a national security issue: not something to be taken lightly—and we will not take it lightly. 
We know the kind of significant information that casinos are able to develop on gaming customers. This information is extraordinary and relevant, and is already used by casinos for a variety of marketing and other business purposes. 
This information can and should be used by your compliance personnel as they monitor customers for suspicious activity. 
Information developed by your security departments for combating and preventing fraud should also be shared with compliance personnel. The legal department should also alert the compliance department when a subpoena is received. A subpoena could trigger reviews of customer risk ratings and account activity. 
Moreover, larger casinos may have multiple affiliated casinos that could benefit from the sharing of information across the organization. 
FinCEN issued guidance in January 2017 discussing how a casino that has filed a SAR may share the SAR, or any information that would reveal the existence of the SAR, with each office or other place of business located within the United States of either the casino itself or a parent or affiliate of the casino. Sharing SARs under these circumstances can assist casinos in identifying suspicious transactions and fulfilling their responsibilities to comply with BSA responsibilities. 
There is a misconception that just because FinCEN has not publicly issued an enforcement action against a casino or card club since last year that FinCEN is not looking at this financial sector. Let me assure you, this is not the case. FinCEN is continually looking at compliance across all financial institutions and will not hesitate to act when it identifies financial institutions that violate the BSA. It is also important to note that not all enforcement actions are public—FinCEN often closes cases with warning letters sent to financial institutions or refers cases to our delegated examiners to conduct additional examinations.
More importantly, a strong culture of compliance promotes breaking down traditional communication and information silos. You need to talk to people other than your compliance people. 
Think about the cyber indicators I just discussed—without close collaboration with your IT and cybersecurity experts, you will only be getting part of the whole picture. It is critical that casinos utilize the information they have on an enterprise-wide basis and ensure it gets into the hands of the right people in your compliance departments. 
Remember that this is not just a best practice, but a requirement under the AML program rule for casinos and card clubs, which makes explicit reference to the use of available information and automated data processing systems to aid in ensuring compliance. 
 
Regulatory Reform, Innovation, and BSA Value
FinCEN recently launched its Innovation Hours Program encouraging financial institutions, FinTech, and RegTech companies to present to FinCEN new and innovative products and services for potential use in the financial sector. 
The goal here is to provide an environment in which FinCEN can better understand innovation as it happens and provide insight or other regulatory action to ensure that innovation and compliance with FinCEN’s regulations—and promotion of anti-money laundering goals more generally—can go hand in hand. 
FinCEN held its first Innovation Hours on July 11th, which focused on artificial intelligence. I encourage casinos and the technology firms supporting them that are employing innovative tools in this space to visit FinCEN’s Innovation page and learn more about this program. 
We would welcome the opportunity to hear from you; it is open to everyone.
Another component of our regulatory reform efforts is in the area of BSA Value. 
In January 2019, FinCEN began an ambitious project to catalogue the value of BSA reporting across the entire value chain of its creation and use. The project will result in a comprehensive and quantitative understanding of the broad value of BSA reporting and other BSA information to all types of consumers of that information.
We already know that BSA data plays a critical role in keeping our country strong, our financial system secure, and our families safe from harm. But FinCEN is using the BSA Value Project to improve how we communicate the way BSA information is valued and used, and to develop metrics to track and measure the value of its use on an ongoing basis. The project has included hundreds of interviews with stakeholder groups, including casinos. 
So far, the study has confirmed there are extensive and extremely varied uses of BSA information across all stakeholders (including by the private sector) consistent with their missions. 
BSA reporting is essential to these activities. Everyone has also agreed that the work of your skilled analysts and investigators (as well as frontline staff, such as those working in the money cages at your casinos) contributes greatly to the value of BSA reporting. Stakeholders also have underscored how there can be equally important value derived from specific fields within a single BSA report (even one filed years ago) and the aggregation of all the information in FinCEN’s database. 
As an example, we are combating an opioid epidemic in this country that has killed thousands of innocent people, destroyed families, and left millions addicted to opioids. Given the current state of the opioid epidemic, a Drug Enforcement Administration agent would likely find tremendous value in obtaining the mobile phone number of a suspect from a casino SAR as that agent knows that the suspect would provide a real phone number to ensure he is called when his winnings are wired out to a bank account. 
Using that mobile number, the agent can build out the communication tree and identify new individuals and entities, new addresses, accounts, etc. An agent can use this information to seek legal approval to wiretap or track the movement of the phone; identify potential informants; build out a network of associates we would never see; and much more. 
In the case of using “big data,” FinCEN is able to apply machine learning and other tools to all the reports and other information available to us to identify and build out illicit finance networks and identify new financial crime trends, which we can share with law enforcement, our OFAC colleagues, regulators, and the private sector (such as the CVC advisory mentioned previously).
We have heard during our discussions that there continues to be a desire for more feedback on what FinCEN is seeing in the BSA data in terms of trends. We need to do better SAR analysis for wider trends and typologies to help casinos. We want to provide more feedback, and we will. My appearance and that of my team at this event is one part of that effort.
I want to share with you briefly some statistics on casino filings as well as trends we are seeing in the BSA data. 
We saw decreases across the gaming sector in SARs filed by casinos in 2018, with a decrease of more than 9 percent in SARs filed between 2017 and 2018. 
From 2017 to 2018, the top five SAR filings by state were Nevada, Louisiana, California, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. While New Jersey experienced a 10% increase, possibly tied to Sports Betting, Nevada (-7%), Louisiana (-15%), and Pennsylvania (-15%) all experienced declines in overall filings, which is symptomatic of the decline in overall industry filings. Other large decreases came from Oklahoma (-51%), Washington (-46%), and Ohio (-45%).
In terms of suspicious activity being reported so far in 2019, Minimal Gaming with Large Transactions is the highest reported activity with more than 5,000 SARs reflecting this activity.
Reports of Chip Walking have dramatically increased since this was added to the SAR form in the summer of 2018. Chip Walking is now the second most selected suspicious activity on the SAR form, with more than 4,400 reports being cited this year to date. 
The other frequently cited suspicious activities include: 

Transaction(s) below CTR Threshold 


Unknown Source of Chips 


Two or More Individuals Working Together 


Alters or Cancels Transaction to Avoid CTR Requirement


Suspicion Concerns Source of Funds

Additional analysis of trends reported by casinos checking the “other” box on the SAR form includes reports of suspicious activity involving sports betting, abandoned jackpot, and bill stuffing.
I wanted to provide these insights because when casinos report their suspicions about illicit activity, they are providing incredibly valuable leads and ongoing support for law enforcement investigations and, importantly, they make it much harder for criminals to move or hide their illicit proceeds in the financial system. 
BSA data also aids investigations tied to bulk cash smuggling, gang activity, significant fraud, transnational organized crime, bribery, health care fraud, corruption, embezzlement, kleptocracy, and third-party money laundering, among other crimes. 
All FBI subject names are run against the BSA database. More than 21 percent of FBI investigations use BSA data, and for some types of crime, like organized crime, nearly 60 percent of FBI investigations use BSA data. Roughly 20 percent of FBI international terrorism cases utilize BSA data. 
The Internal Revenue Service-Criminal Investigation section alone conducts more than 126,000 BSA database inquiries each year. And as much as 24 percent of its investigations involving criminal tax, money laundering, and other BSA violations are directly initiated by, or associated with, a BSA report. 
In addition to providing controlled access to the data to law enforcement, FinCEN also proactively pushes certain information to them on critical topics. On a daily basis, FinCEN takes the suspicious activity reports and we run them through several categories of business rules or algorithms to identify reports that merit further review by our analysts. 
Our terrorist financing-related business rules alone generate over 1,000 matches each month for review and further dissemination to our law enforcement and regulatory partners in what we call a Flash report. These Flash reports enable the FBI, for example, to identify, track, and disrupt the activities of potential terrorist actors. It is incredibly valuable information. 
For more information about all the ways law enforcement uses FinCEN’s data, I encourage you to go to our website, www.fincen.gov, where we have listed over 500 specific examples of how financial institution reporting has aided law enforcement cases. 
Also, in May, FinCEN honored a number of law enforcement professionals from around the country who used BSA data to successfully investigate and prosecute criminal cases that posed a threat to our financial system and our national security. 
In reviewing the cases, you will see that the BSA reporting for these cases aided investigations tied to weapons trafficking, bulk cash smuggling, gang activity, significant fraud, transnational organized crime, bribery, corruption, embezzlement, narcotics, and third-party money laundering.
I would like to conclude my remarks by sharing details of one of this year’s award recipient cases, which was made possible by the BSA filings of SIX casinos, THREE of which are in this room today. 
This case was in the Transnational Organized Crime category, and the award recipients were from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). The award was presented by Bess Michael from FinCEN, and Elizabeth Cronan representing the American Gaming Association. 
Members of DEA Las Vegas District Office initiated this operation that targeted a criminal organization operating across the United States, Europe, Asia, South America, and Central America. The case was initiated as a result of sensitive information investigators obtained regarding the money laundering activities of over a dozen individuals. The information indicated that these subjects were responsible for laundering millions of dollars throughout the world, utilizing many different methods to carry out their illicit operations.
Through financial data analysis and surveillance operations, law enforcement investigators learned that this large-scale criminal operation was involved in the distribution of cocaine and heroin, along with laundering the illicit proceeds, both domestically and internationally. 
As a result of the intercepts associated with several of the targets identified in the financial data, DEA agents seized over 2,500 kilograms of cocaine, 25 kilograms of heroin, 8.5 kilograms of methamphetamines, and over $570,000 in cash in the United States, Colombia, Panama, the Dominican Republic, Spain, and Costa Rica. Investigators were also able to link the targets to the Gulf Cartel, Sinaloa Cartel, and the Italian criminal organization Ndrangheta.
Further investigative efforts, which included financial data analysis, grand jury subpoena results, search warrants results, and interviews with confidential sources, revealed that this organization engaged in a wide range of techniques and business operations to conduct its criminal activity. 
Its techniques included structuring, casino gaming schemes, fraudulent investment funds, false invoicing, fictitious business fronts, public corruption, and trade based money laundering schemes. The business operations they utilized included movie companies, jewelry stores, money exchange houses, and armored car companies.
Throughout the course of this multi-year investigation, agents seized more than $5.5 million in currency and assets, including a $750,000 airplane. Coordinated efforts with U.S. and foreign law enforcement agencies and financial intelligence units led to indictments and arrest warrants for numerous members of this criminal organization on various money laundering, narcotics distribution, and conspiracy charges. Several extraditions on additional subjects are pending and several other individuals remain international fugitives. One of the primary targets has already pled guilty and was sentenced to a 30-year prison term and ordered to forfeit $284 million in criminal proceeds. The remaining targets are pending trial.
Again, it was the reporting of six casinos that made this successful prosecution possible. Make no mistake: The work you are doing makes a profound difference in peoples’ lives. The information provides leads, helps expand cases, identifies networks of criminals and other bad actors, and often helps to alert the regulatory and law enforcement communities to trends in illicit activity, making our communities safer—it protects our families from harm. 
What you do saves lives.
It is a national security issue. 
As I close today, I want to mention a very important national security issue—beneficial ownership information. Its importance to our national security cannot be understated.
Criminals of all kinds, including terrorists, establish domestic shell companies to mask and further their criminal activity, to invest and buy assets with illicit proceeds, and to prevent law enforcement and others from efficiently and effectively investigating tips or leads, thus allowing these bad actors to hide from justice and continue their bad acts. 
FinCEN’s recent Customer Due Diligence Final Rule, which requires the collection of beneficial ownership information for legal entities when opening an account at a bank or other financial institution, is but one critical step toward closing this national security gap. 
The second critical step in closing this national security gap is collecting beneficial ownership information at the corporate formation stage. We are committed to working with Congress to find the best way to address this serious gap.
 
Conclusion
I know you have a full few days ahead of you, so in concluding I want to mention that Tom Ott, FinCEN’s Associate Director for Enforcement, and Kevin O’Connor, one of our compliance and enforcement officers, will be participating on several panels over the course of the next two days where they will further discuss many of the issues I have raised this morning. Please do not hesitate to seek them out if you have any questions or feedback for us. 
Thank you again for your time and attention this morning. 
 
###



Content


Testimony for the Record of Kenneth A. Blanco, Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, U.S. Department of the Treasury
House Committee on Financial Services
Subcommittee on Terrorism and Illicit Finance
May 16, 2018



Introduction
Chairman Pearce, Ranking Member Perlmutter, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to appear before the Subcommittee on Terrorism and Illicit Finance on behalf of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (“FinCEN”). FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and to promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss how the Customer Due Diligence (“CDD”) rule and its compliance requirements for financial institutions advance our efforts to combat money laundering, terrorist financing and other serious crimes.
The reach, speed, and accessibility of the U.S. financial system make it an attractive target to money launderers, fraudsters, terrorists, rogue states, and other bad actors. To combat efforts by these individuals, groups or networks to abuse the U.S. financial system, we have developed and rigorously enforce one of the most effective anti-money laundering (“AML”) and countering the financing of terrorism (“CFT”) regimes in the world. But, as strong as our AML/CFT framework is, malicious actors will continue to attempt to exploit any vulnerability to move their illicit proceeds undetected through legitimate financial channels, in order to hide, foster, or expand the reach of their criminal or terrorist activity. We must therefore be vigilant in our mission to protect the U.S. financial system by: (1) aggressively investigating and pursuing criminal and terrorist activity; (2) ensuring that we collect the financial intelligence necessary to support these investigations; (3) understanding the evolving trends and typologies of criminal and terrorist activity; and (4) closing any regulatory gaps that expose our financial system to money laundering, other criminal activity, and terrorist financing risks that threaten our financial system and put our nation, communities, and families in harm’s way.
The misuse of legal entities to disguise illicit activity has been a key vulnerability in the U.S. financial system. Corporate structures have facilitated anonymous access to the financial system for criminal activity and terrorism. Narcotraffickers, proliferation financiers, money launderers, terrorists and other criminals have been able to establish shell companies, which then use accounts at financial institutions, directly or indirectly, without ever having to reveal who ultimately is behind the transactions being facilitated. This has made it difficult for law enforcement to pursue investigative leads, and for financial intelligence units to produce those leads in the first instance. And, just as important, this has made it difficult for financial institutions to apply effective risk-based AML programs.
An open and transparent financial system in which we can identify the trail of transactions and actual account owners is therefore essential to disrupting illicit activities and dismantling criminal and terrorist networks. For these reasons, FinCEN and the Department of the Treasury more broadly have prioritized increasing transparency in corporate formation and have strengthened regulatory requirements regarding customer due diligence for legal entity customers when they open accounts at financial institutions.
Background on CDD Rulemaking
FinCEN finalized the “Customer Due Diligence Requirements for Financial Institutions,” (or “CDD Rule”) on May 11, 2016. Before finalizing the CDD Rule, FinCEN engaged in a transparent rulemaking process, to develop the best rule possible: and one that accounted for concerns raised by the public and private sectors. To this end, FinCEN first issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“ANPRM”) in 2012, to seek early feedback regarding potential CDD and beneficial ownership requirements for financial institutions.1 We received approximately 90 comments in response to the ANPRM. To better understand and address the concerns raised in those comments, FinCEN and Treasury representatives held five public hearings in Washington, D.C., and across the country.2 These engagements allowed stakeholders to express their views on the ANPRM and offer recommendations on how best to develop a workable rule that would help financial institutions better know their customers and assist law enforcement in identifying illicit actors hiding behind the veils of corporate structures. We then issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“NPRM”) on August 4, 2014, incorporating feedback received from this engagement.3 FinCEN received 141 comments in response to the NPRM from financial institutions, trade associations, Federal and State agencies, non-governmental organizations, members of Congress, and others.
The extensive and thoughtful engagement with industry and other stakeholders, through notice and comment, hearings, and other discussions over several years about the benefits of the rule and potential costs and burdens has deeply influenced the resulting regulations. We believe that the CDD Rule takes a pragmatic approach, balancing the need for information and the practicality of obtaining it in certain circumstances.
The CDD Rule clarifies and strengthens CDD requirements for covered financial institutions, which include banks, securities broker-dealers, mutual funds, and futures commission merchants and introducing brokers in commodities. The rule streamlines and standardizes existing regulatory requirements to promote consistency in both implementing and enforcing these requirements across and within financial sectors; it adds a new requirement for these financial institutions to know the real people who own, control, and profit from companies (also known as “beneficial owners”)—and verify their identities.
The CDD Rule advances the purpose of the Bank Secrecy Act by making available valuable information needed to disrupt illicit finance networks and other criminal or terrorist activities. This in turn increases financial transparency and augments the ability of financial institutions and law enforcement to identify the assets and accounts of criminals and national security threats. It also facilitates compliance with sanctions programs and other measures that cut off financial flows to these actors, just as it facilitates reporting and investigations in support of tax compliance.
In addition, by promoting consistency in implementing and enforcing CDD regulatory expectations, the rule also helps financial institutions assess and mitigate risk and comply with all existing legal requirements.
Final Beneficial Ownership and Customer Due Diligence (CDD) Rule for Legal Entity Customers
In brief, the CDD Rule includes four core requirements. Covered financial institutions must:
1) Identify and verify the identity of customers (this was an existing requirement prior to the CDD Rule);
2) Identify and verify the identity of the beneficial owners of companies opening accounts (this is a new requirement);
3) Understand the nature and purpose of customer relationships; and
4) Conduct ongoing monitoring to identify and report suspicious transactions and, on a risk basis, to maintain and update customer information. (These last two elements are AML program requirements in the CDD Rule that codify regulatory expectations of what financial institutions should have been doing prior to the CDD Rule to comply with their suspicious activity reporting requirements effectively.)
The definition of beneficial owner contains two prongs— the ownership or equity prong and the control prong. Financial institutions must collect information under each prong at account opening to comply with the rule. Under the ownership or equity prong, a covered financial institution must obtain information from a legal entity customer on any natural person who owns, directly or indirectly, 25 percent or more of the legal entity customer. This could include up to four individuals, or, no individuals (if no one owned 25 percent or more). When no individual meets the threshold for ownership interest under the rule, the control prong becomes all the more important. Under the control prong, the covered financial institution must collect information on at least one natural person with significant responsibility to control, manage, or direct the legal entity customer. This could include, for example, a company’s president, chief executive officer, or another individual having significant control over and decision-making authority within the company.
Significantly, in obtaining this information, covered financial institutions can rely on the information provided and certified by the legal entity customer opening the account. The covered financial institution generally does not have to go beyond what is provided, unless it has reason to believe that the information provided is unreliable.
Implementation of the Customer Due Diligence Rule
FinCEN is committed to ensuring effective implementation of the CDD Rule. As noted earlier, prior to issuance of the NPRM for the CDD Rule, FinCEN actively solicited feedback from industry and engaged in robust engagement with stakeholders. After considering comments on our proposed rule, we extended the proposed one-year compliance period in the NPRM to two years, in order to provide financial institutions additional time to address operational needs, including developing related policies and procedures, providing training to employees, and preparing customer communication.
During the past two years, FinCEN also has taken additional steps to ensure that covered financial institutions and other stakeholders understand the rule’s requirements. For example, in July 2016, shortly after FinCEN issued the final rule, FinCEN published an initial set of Frequently Asked Questions (“FAQs”), which provided guidance to financial institutions on the key components of the rule, such as:
• A summary of the rule’s requirements;
• An explanation of which financial institutions are covered by the rule;
• A description of the identification information to be obtained from legal entity customers at account opening;
• The mechanism for collecting and verifying the identity of beneficial owners;
• The required policies and procedures financial institutions must implement to obtain information on beneficial owners and to conduct ongoing customer due diligence; and
• Information regarding how financial institutions must use the collected information.
FinCEN and other Treasury representatives have also engaged with various stakeholders, including financial institutions, trade associations, regulators, and examiners, at conferences, workshops and in other fora, to explain and clarify various aspects of the rule and hear about emerging questions. FinCEN also has provided ongoing feedback to financial institutions by responding to questions about the rule submitted to the FinCEN Resource Center.
Based on continued feedback from industry, more recently, on April 3, 2018, FinCEN published a second set of 37 FAQs that provides detailed responses to a wide array of questions stakeholders have raised since the rule was published. Many of the FAQs incorporate topics and address scenarios that had been discussed with stakeholders before the FAQs were published.
As reflected in the recent FAQs, FinCEN takes a practical approach to how the rule should be implemented—an approach that continues to balance the need for transparency in corporate ownership and control with the compliance burden and costs to industry.
Lastly, FinCEN has participated in webinars sponsored by industry and regulators to discuss the rule’s requirements and any additional questions stakeholders, including financial institutions and examiners, may raise.
Compliance and Enforcement of the Customer Due Diligence Rule
As you may be aware, FinCEN has delegated its examination authority to the Federal functional regulators responsible for supervising and examining covered financial institutions, including the Federal Banking Agencies (i.e., Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration), the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, as
well as with the self-regulatory organizations (i.e., the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for broker-dealers and the National Futures Association for futures firms).
FinCEN has worked collaboratively and has maintained regular and ongoing discussions with its regulatory counterparts to ensure a common understanding and consistent compliance and enforcement standards within and across regulated industry sectors. FinCEN will continue to work with these agencies regarding their examination approach to ensure that we help covered financial institutions achieve compliance.
Although we expect covered institutions to be ready on May 11, 2018, to begin timely and effective implementation of the policies, procedures, and controls required under the CDD Rule—and we are pleased to have heard from many in industry that they were ready—we also understand that institutions, regulators and other stakeholders may need a little extra time to smooth out any wrinkles. This is the case whenever we issue a new rule, the purpose of which is always to enhance our AML regime and not to serve as a vehicle for punishing financial institutions. There is always an understandable expectation that industry’s fine-tuning of its implementation, and the government’s fine-tuning of the examination process itself, takes time and that new questions often emerge after implementation begins. We have spoken with our counterparts, including the Federal Banking Agencies, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, to discuss these issues. We are all committed to ensuring that covered financial institutions are able to implement the rule effectively, and in a way that makes practical sense.
Our goal in this rule is to gain the transparency needed to protect the U.S. financial system and to prevent, deter, detect and disrupt money laundering, terrorist financing, and other serious crimes. It is important for us to continue to work with our regulatory partners, their examiners and financial institutions to achieve these objectives through compliance with the rule. It is equally important, however, to understand that seamless implementation does not happen overnight and, for some areas, we all will need time to benefit from cumulative practical experiences with the new rule as part of the process. In the meantime, we would encourage financial institutions to alert their examiners to any issues early on, and to share such concerns with FinCEN. We will continue to work with industry and regulators to understand and help address any concerns.
FinCEN will continue to engage industry groups and other stakeholders to understand any specific unintended challenges that the rule may present and, if necessary, FinCEN will provide further guidance. Likewise, we will work with regulatory and law enforcement partners to understand and address any compliance issues appropriately.
Conclusion
I would like to thank the Committee for its efforts on this important matter and look forward to working with this Committee and other members of Congress to continue combatting money laundering and illicit finance threats to secure our financial system, keep our nation safe and prosperous, and protect our communities and families from harm.
-----
1 77 FR 13046 (Mar. 5, 2012).2 81 FR. 29,398, 29,402 n. 31 (May 11, 2016).3 79 FR 45,151 (Aug. 4, 2014).
 



Content



Contact
Steve Hudak, 703-905-3770



Immediate Release
February 15, 2018


Bank capped number of alerts rather than invest resources to investigate suspicious activity


WASHINGTON—The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), in coordination with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the U.S. Department of Justice, today announced the assessment of a $185 million civil money penalty against U.S. Bank for willful violations of several provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). U.S. Bank’s obligation will be satisfied by payment of $70 million to the U.S. Department of the Treasury with the remaining amount satisfied by payments in accordance with the DOJ’s actions. Since 2011, U.S. Bank willfully violated the BSA’s program and reporting requirements by failing to establish and implement an adequate anti-money laundering program, failing to report suspicious activity, and failing to adequately report currency transactions.
Banks are required to conduct risk-based monitoring to sift through transactions and to alert staff to potentially suspicious activity. Instead of addressing apparent risks, U.S. Bank capped the number of alerts its automated transaction monitoring system would generate to identify only a predetermined number of transactions for further investigation, without regard for the legitimate alerts that would be lost due to the cap.
“U.S. Bank is being penalized for willfully violating the Bank Secrecy Act, and failing to address and report suspicious activity. U.S. Bank chose to manipulate their software to cap the number of suspicious activity alerts rather than to increase capacity to comply with anti-money laundering laws,” said FinCEN Director Kenneth A. Blanco. “U.S. Bank’s own anti-money laundering staff warned against the risk of this alerts-capping strategy, but these warnings were ignored by management. U.S. Bank failed in its duty to protect our financial system against money laundering and provide law enforcement with valuable information.”
U.S. Bank systemically and continually devoted an inadequate amount of resources to its AML program.  Internal testing by U.S. Bank showed that alert capping caused it to fail to investigate and report thousands of suspicious transactions. Instead of removing the alert caps, the bank terminated the testing. U.S. Bank also allowed, and failed to monitor, non-customers conducting millions of dollars of risky currency transfers at its branches through a large money transmitter.  In addition, U.S. Bank filed over 5,000 Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) with incomplete or inaccurate information, impeding law enforcement’s ability to identify and track potentially unlawful behavior. 
U.S. Bank also had an inadequate process to handle high-risk customers. As a result, customers whom the bank identified or should have identified as high-risk were free to conduct transactions through the bank, with little or no bank oversight.  By not having an adequate process in place to address high-risk customers, U.S. Bank failed to appropriately analyze or report the illicit financial risks of its customer base. These failures precluded the bank from adequately addressing the risks that such customers posed, including filing timely suspicious activity reports that law enforcement investigators rely upon to recognize and to pursue financial criminals.
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.


Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content



Interagency Statement on Sharing BSA Resources - (Final 10-3-18) (003).pdf24.29 KB


Contact
Steve Hudak 703-905-3770


Immediate Release
October 03, 2018




Introduction
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) (collectively, the Agencies), are publishing this statement to address instances in which banks[1] may decide to enter into collaborative arrangements to share resources to manage their Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and anti-money laundering (AML) obligations more efficiently and effectively. Collaborative arrangements as described in this statement generally are most suitable for banks with a community focus, less complex operations, and lower-risk profiles for money laundering or terrorist financing. The risk profile is bank-specific, and should be based on a risk assessment that properly considers all risk areas, including products, services, customers, entities, and geographic locations.[2]
 
Collaborative arrangements involve two or more banks with the objective of participating in a common activity or pooling resources to achieve a common goal. Banks use collaborative arrangements to pool human, technology, or other resources to reduce costs, increase operational efficiencies, and leverage specialized expertise.
 
Notably, this interagency statement does not apply to collaborative arrangements or consortia formed for the purpose of sharing information under Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act. Further, banks that form collaborative arrangements as described in this interagency statement are not an association for purposes of Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act.[3] Banks should contact FinCEN for additional information concerning the 314(b) program and requirements.
 
All banks are required to establish and maintain procedures reasonably designed to ensure compliance with the BSA and to develop and implement BSA/AML programs.[4] The BSA/AML compliance program must include the following: 1) a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance; 2) independent testing of BSA/AML compliance; 3) designating an individual or individuals responsible for managing BSA compliance (BSA compliance officer); and 4) training for appropriate personnel.[5] A bank is expected to have a BSA/AML compliance program commensurate with its respective risk profile.
 
Benefits of Sharing a Resource
The cost of meeting BSA requirements and effectively managing the risk that illicit finance poses to the broader U.S. financial system may be reduced through sharing employees or other resources in a collaborative arrangement with one or more other banks. These arrangements may also provide access to specialized expertise that may otherwise be challenging to acquire without the collaboration. The following examples describe situations in which the use of shared human, technology or other resources in a collaborative arrangement may be beneficial for banks. These examples are not intended to be exhaustive.
 
Internal Controls Example
Banks are required to provide for a system of internal controls to assure ongoing compliance with the BSA. A collaborative arrangement may be entered into by two or more banks to share resources between the respective banks to conduct internal control functions. Some examples of functions that may be conducted utilizing shared resources include: 1) reviewing, updating, and drafting BSA/AML policies and procedures; 2) reviewing and developing risk-based customer identification and account monitoring processes; and 3) tailoring monitoring systems and reports for the risks posed.
 
Independent Testing Example
Banks are required to provide for independent testing for compliance. That testing may be conducted by an outside party or bank personnel. Such testing should provide an evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the bank’s BSA/AML compliance program.
 
Some banks may have personnel that perform multiple job functions, making it difficult to identify an employee within the bank to conduct an independent test of the BSA/AML compliance program. Personnel at one bank may be utilized to conduct the BSA/AML independent test at another bank within a collaborative arrangement. The shared resource may, for example, be utilized in the scoping, planning, and performance of the BSA/AML compliance program independent test with appropriate safeguards in place to ensure the confidentiality of sensitive business information. The banks involved in the collaborative arrangement need to ensure that the shared resource conducting the BSA/AML independent testing is qualified and not involved in other BSA/AML functions at the bank being reviewed, such as training or developing policies and procedures that may present a conflict of interest or lack of independence.
 
BSA/AML Training Example
Banks must ensure that appropriate personnel are trained in BSA regulatory requirements and in internal BSA/AML policies, procedures, and processes.
 
It may be challenging to acquire personnel with BSA/AML expertise in some communities. It may also be cost prohibitive to attract a qualified outside BSA/AML trainer. A collaborative arrangement between two or more banks may provide the latitude to hire a qualified instructor to conduct the BSA/AML training, allowing the bank to share the cost. Examples of basic BSA/AML training topics that may be covered by shared resources include: alert analysis and investigation techniques, alert trends and money laundering methods, and regulatory updates.
 
Other Considerations
The bank’s board of directors must designate a qualified individual or individuals to serve as the BSA compliance officer.[6] The sharing of a BSA officer among banks could be challenging due to the confidential nature of suspicious activity reports filed and the ability of the BSA officer to effectively coordinate and monitor each bank’s day-to-day BSA/AML compliance. In addition, the sharing of a BSA officer may create challenges with effective communication between the BSA officer and each bank’s board of directors and senior management. Accordingly, it may not be appropriate for banks to enter into a collaborative arrangement to share a BSA officer.[7]
 
Risk Considerations and Mitigation
 
The use of collaborative arrangements to manage BSA/AML obligations requires careful consideration regarding the type of collaboration in relation to the bank’s risk profile, adequate documentation, consideration of legal restrictions, and the establishment of appropriate oversight mechanisms; and should be consistent with sound principles of corporate governance. For example, a bank’s board of directors should provide for appropriate oversight of BSA/AML collaborative arrangements in advance. As is standard, a collaborative arrangement should be supported by a contractual agreement between the banks, with the performance reviewed by management and evaluated on a periodic basis. Banks should refer to their respective regulator’s existing guidance regarding third-party relationships.
 
A collaborative arrangement for sharing employees or other resources to manage BSA/AML obligations is similar to using dual-employees. Guidance in this area could be relevant to contractual agreements between banks sharing BSA/AML resources.[8] Banks must also comply with all applicable legal restrictions, including limitations on the disclosure of confidential supervisory information, confidential financial and business information, individual customer data, and trade secrets, as well as restrictions governing collaborative arrangements among competitors generally, such as rules designed to limit conflicts of interest. 
 
As is usual and customary when a bank enters into an arrangement with a third-party, a collaborative arrangement should be appropriately documented to define the nature and type of resources to be shared, define each institution’s rights and responsibilities, establish procedures for protecting customer data and confidential information, and develop a framework to manage risks associated with the sharing of resources. Reasonable systems should be established to ensure that bank management adequately oversees the activities of shared resources. Banks should devote sufficient resources for monitoring services performed under the collaborative arrangement. Periodic reports related to BSA/AML collaborative arrangements should be provided to senior management and reported to the board of directors as appropriate in conjunction with their regular oversight of bank activities.
 
It is important that collaborative arrangements be designed and implemented in accordance with the bank’s risk profile for money laundering and terrorist financing. Ultimately, each bank is responsible for ensuring compliance with BSA requirements. Sharing resources in no way relieves a bank of this responsibility. Nothing in this interagency statement alters a bank’s existing legal and regulatory requirements.
 
Conclusion
Banks may benefit from using shared resources to manage certain BSA/AML obligations more efficiently and effectively. However, banks should approach the establishment of collaborative arrangements like other business decisions, with due diligence and thorough consideration of the risks and benefits. Banks are encouraged to contact their primary federal regulator regarding sharing BSA resources, and should refer to other relevant guidance
 
[1] Under the BSA the term “bank” is defined in 31 CFR 1010.100(d) and includes each agent, agency, branch or office within the United States of banks, savings associations, credit unions, and foreign banks.
[2] See Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Examination Manual (2014), at https://bsaaml.ffiec.gov/pages_manual/manual_online.htm
[3] See Voluntary Information Sharing Among Financial Institutions, 31 CFR 1010.540.
[4] See 31 U.S.C. 5311 et seq., 31 U.S.C. 5318(h)(1), and the federal banking agencies’ implementing BSA/AML compliance program regulations: 12 CFR 208.63, 12 CFR 211.5(m), and 12 CFR 211.24(j) (FRB); 12 CFR 326.8 (FDIC); 12 CFR 748.2 (NCUA); and 12 CFR 21.21 (OCC).
[5] See 31 CFR 1020.210 and 1010.230 – Under the Customer Due Diligence rule, banks are required to develop and implement appropriate risk-based procedures for conducting ongoing customer due diligence, to include, but not be limited to (i) understanding the nature and purpose of customer relationships for the purpose of developing a customer risk profile; and (ii) conducting ongoing monitoring to identify and report suspicious transactions and, on a risk basis, to maintain and update customer information (including beneficial owners of legal entity customers).
[6] See 12 CFR 208.63, 12 CFR 211.5(m), and 12 CFR 211.24(j) (FRB); 12 CFR 326.8 (FDIC); 12 CFR 748.2 (NCUA); and 12 CFR 21.21 (OCC).
[7] Although it may not generally be appropriate to share a BSA officer through a collaborative arrangement, it may be more appropriate between affiliated banks.
[8] See e.g., FDIC’s Risk Management Manual of Examination Policies, Chapter 4.3 Related Organizations, Dual Employees Section at https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/safety/manual/section4-3.pdf.
[9] See e.g., OCC’s “An Opportunity for Community Banks: Working Together Collaboratively” (January 13, 2015), at https://www.occ.gov /publications/publications-by-type/other-publications-reports/pub-other-community-banks-working-collaborately.PDF.
 


Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content



Contact
Steve Hudak, 703-905-3770



Immediate Release
May 08, 2018




WASHINGTON— In a ceremony held at the U.S. Department of the Treasury today, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) recognized the outstanding efforts of law enforcement agencies that successfully used Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) reporting in their criminal investigations. The BSA’s recordkeeping and reporting requirements help to create a financial trail that law enforcement agencies use to track criminals, their activities, and their assets. The FinCEN Director’s Law Enforcement Awards Program underscores the importance of a successful partnership between the financial industry that provides BSA information and law enforcement that utilizes it.   
“Industry reporting under the BSA is critical to supporting law enforcement investigations that combat money laundering and other financial crimes,” said U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin. “Today we are recognizing the tireless efforts of law enforcement to combat financial crimes and thanking them for their partnership. We also appreciate our partnership with the new private sector as they identify and report suspicious activity.”
“FinCEN’s awards highlight how vital BSA information is in law enforcement, counterterrorism, and national security investigations, as we work to stop the flow of illicit money,” said Sigal Mandelker, Under Secretary of the Treasury’s Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  “These awards highlight successful law enforcement actions that resulted from critical BSA information and the great value that financial institutions bring to these cases through their reporting of suspicious activity.”
“BSA data is one of the first lines of defense in our fight to keep our country, our communities, and our families safe,” said FinCEN Director Kenneth A. Blanco. “I am proud to confer these awards on our law enforcement partners to demonstrate how important the submission of this data is, and how it can be best utilized by true professionals. BSA information helps put together pieces of the puzzle we would not otherwise see.” 
Representatives from financial industry trade groups, including The Clearing House Association, the Institute of International Bankers, the Independent Community Bankers of America, the American Bankers Association, and the Credit Union National Association, also assisted in the presentation of each award. 
Since 2015, FinCEN has held the annual program to recognize law enforcement agencies that make effective use of financial institution reporting to successfully pursue and prosecute cases, and to demonstrate to the financial industry the value of its reporting under the BSA. With this year’s addition of a category recognizing state and local law enforcement, FinCEN’s annual program now includes seven award categories acknowledging achievements in combatting significant threats to the integrity of the financial system and the safety of our communities. The program is open to all Federal, state, local, and tribal law enforcement agencies. The 2018 award categories and award recipients are listed below. 
 
SAR Review Team:  Internal Revenue Service – Criminal Investigation (IRS-CI)
IRS-CI investigators initiated their case based on a review of financial data showing a pattern of unusual cash withdrawals by one subject from a single financial institution. Large deposits from the estate of a recently deceased individual funded the withdrawals. In addition to the withdrawals, the funds were also being electronically transferred to other individuals and accounts with no personal connection to the deceased, aside from being tenants in a home owned by the decedent. IRS-CI officials coordinated with the Toledo Police Department and determined that the initial subject was part of a larger criminal conspiracy to defraud the estate of the deceased individual of over $2 million.
Investigators uncovered a large volume of falsified documents executed by the conspirators, including a well-known local attorney, to liquidate the deceased individual’s accounts and cover up the conspiracy. The attorney falsely induced the local probate court to process fraudulent documents giving her control of the estate, rather than to the true heir.
IRS-CI officials executed search warrants based on the laundering of the criminal proceeds, and falsified documents submitted to the probate court. The warrants were successful in recovering nearly $500,000 in currency, a motor home, three vehicles, and four parcels of real estate. All four conspirators were indicted, arrested, and convicted of various money laundering, structuring, and conspiracy charges and sentenced to 24 to 111 months in prison. Additionally, over $2 million in restitution was ordered to be returned to the true heir of the estate.
 
Transnational Organized Crime:  Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
Relying heavily on financial data and FinCEN’s investigative tools, DEA officials successfully helped dismantle two very lucrative Southern California and Tijuana-based money laundering organizations. These criminal groups utilized a complex network of cash couriers, accounts, shell companies, and investments throughout the United States and Latin America to launder drug proceeds for various Sinaloa Cartel-linked traffickers.
Over the course of their investigation, DEA investigators poured over a high volume of data to piece together the financial trail. Information obtained from a suspect involved in a bulk cash seizure in Chicago tied him to subjects that the agents were already investigating in southern California. Subsequent investigative efforts identified a group of nine individuals with ties to a locally based money laundering organization with an international nexus. Valuable information obtained through FinCEN resources, banks, and other investigative avenues provided the agents with the basis to implement several wire intercepts.
DEA officials coordinated their efforts with Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) officials after the wire intercepts revealed more information about the criminal activities of this organization. This coordination led to the inclusion of an additional criminal organization into the investigative efforts. The two organizations were separate, but associated through common individuals. A Tijuana-based attorney led one of the organizations under the guise of a property management company, receiving and depositing millions of dollars in illicit drug proceeds for the purported purpose of purchasing Mexican real estate. Investigators learned that this attorney had the assistance of a bank branch manager, who protected the organization’s accounts from scrutiny in exchange for a “commission.” The second organization was run in a similar fashion, under the guise of a grain company, and moved nearly $45,000 per day in illicit drug proceeds.
As a result of their efforts, investigators served over 50 search warrants in southern California. Arrest warrants were issued for 27 individuals, 20 of whom have been apprehended. Officials were able to seize millions of dollars in cash, real estate, and vehicles. DEA personnel also assisted the Mexican government with a parallel investigation into many of the same individuals. This assistance led to the freezing and seizure of additional high value accounts and Mexican financial institutions.
 
Transnational Security Threats:  Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
A unique combination of FBI agents, analysts, accountants, and Assistant U.S. Attorneys with expertise in money laundering, national security, counterintelligence, economics, and other disciplines led this investigation into North Korean sanctions violations. This team of investigators poured through mountains of financial data and utilized several FinCEN resources to enhance its investigation and develop the basis to obtain numerous search warrants. This effort led to the seizure and filing of a forfeiture complaint for the largest sum of North Korean funds in the history of the Department of Justice.
FBI investigators became aware of an elaborate network of front companies, which sanctioned North Korean entities used to purchase millions of dollars of gasoil from a Russian provider. The front companies then accessed the U.S. financial system on behalf of the North Korean entities, thereby evading U.S. sanctions. FBI officials identified transactions of this nature, and in coordination with Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), were able to block these transactions and others, totaling nearly $7 million. The transaction data was compared to shipping records and, as a result of this analysis, the Department of Justice instituted a forfeiture action and civil money laundering penalty against two of the entities for $20 million.
FBI utilized numerous FinCEN resources, which resulted in critical information that became the basis for a money laundering penalty and development of forfeiture actions. This investigation led to a forfeiture action for nearly $7 million previously blocked by OFAC, the $20 million monetary penalty, and the addition of several entities to OFAC’s Designated Nationals and Blocked persons List (SDN list).
 
Cyber Threats:  Internal Revenue Service – Criminal Investigation (IRS-CI)
This IRS-CI-led investigation began after a review of financial data revealed numerous unexplained cash withdrawals by an individual sourced with large wire transfers from an unknown corporation. IRS-CI officials, in coordination with other local, federal, and international law enforcement agencies, untangled a complicated web of cyber intrusion, black market transactions, and global money laundering.
The investigation’s primary subjects were four individuals involved in a scheme to reverse engineer a specific video game to fraudulently generate a large amount of the in-game currency used by legitimate online players to enhance their gaming experience. The subjects then sold the in-game currency to individuals around the world on the black market. The subjects employed software that bypassed the game’s security mechanisms and fooled the game’s servers into believing that millions of online games had been played in short periods, thus generating a high volume of in-game currency paid out to the subjects who controlled various accounts. Investigators with the video game publisher identified an unusually high volume of connection traffic from a particular IP subnet. This helped them identify which accounts were receiving the in-game currency and they determined that once a certain threshold of currency was generated by an online account, the currency was then transferred off the account.
Many of the payments to the subjects’ bank accounts were sent from multiple foreign-based accounts, which led investigators to seek further financial data. The information they were able to obtain through FinCEN resources was critical in untangling the money laundering scheme.
By the time search and seizure warrants were issued, the scheme had generated over $17 million in proceeds, which resulted in cash holdings, luxury real estate, high value bank accounts, and numerous high-end vehicles. These warrants were issued simultaneously with search warrants at multiple residences across the United States. This led to the forfeiture of $10 million in fraudulent proceeds. Three of the subjects pled guilty to conspiracy to commit fraud and related activity in connection with computers, and the fourth subject was found guilty of wire fraud and money laundering.
 
Significant Fraud:  Immigration and Customs Enforcement – Homeland Security Investigations (HSI)
This HSI-led investigation identified a complex money laundering conspiracy in which India-based call center operators and U.S.-based facilitators worked together to launder 300 million USD (stolen from over 17,000 victims) into the U.S. banking system through an international hawala network. HSI investigators poured through massive amounts of financial data to help identify undiscovered accounts and transactions involving their subjects.
Investigators and attorneys from several federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies conducted an investigation into an international scheme to extort funds from U.S. residents. The investigation was triggered by complaints received from victims of fraud who received phone calls from individuals impersonating government officials. These individuals extorted payments by threatening arrest and deportation of the victims. Investigators were able to subpoena many of the banks sending and receiving such payments, which indicated that a significant portion of the funds was being used to fulfill hawala transactions for Indian and Iranian Americans. Subsequent reviews of financial data identified the individuals and businesses receiving the funds and outlined the movement of funds between subjects.
Investigators used information obtained from subpoenas in the production of the indictment documents, naming 56 individuals in the United States and India, as well as five India-based call centers. Twenty-four subjects in the United States were arrested across eight states, all of whom were convicted of conspiracy, money laundering, and various fraud crimes. Investigators also determined that none of the domestic subjects who conducted hawala operations were operating as a registered money services business (MSB).
 
Third-Party Money Launderers:  Internal Revenue Service – Criminal Investigation (IRS-CI)
This investigation, led by the IRS-CI, was a multi-agency effort to combat Mexican kleptocracy, involving senior political figures and the illicit use of the U.S. financial system. Representatives from IRS-CI, DEA, HSI, FBI, and other federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies co-sponsored Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF) investigations in order to jointly investigate this case. Financial data played a critical role in this investigation by initially bringing the criminal activity to the attention of investigators and identifying numerous co-conspirators and previously unidentified accounts and transactions from Mexico to the United States.
During the investigation, law enforcement officials learned that individuals were transferring large sums of money from Mexico into the United States. Investigators determined that the funds originated as bribe payments to government officials from Mexican drug cartels, the theft of Mexican government funds, and various contractor bribe schemes. Several Mexican government officials used their positions to send illegally gained funds through a series of shell companies in an attempt to conceal the nature of the funds. The officials included numerous former state Governors and lower-ranking associates and businessmen. The Mexican officials laundered their money through various accounts and transactions in the United States, including real estate and aircraft purchases. Investigators determined that two individuals set up several accounts and companies in Texas and sent approximately $50 million in wire transfers, which they subsequently used to purchase real estate in Texas or send through shell companies to accounts domiciled in Bermuda.
Investigators from the various law enforcement agencies used a high volume of financial data to trace the illicit funds’ movement. Investigators also utilized numerous FinCEN resources, which were critical in identifying accounts and transactions belonging to the subjects of the investigation. 
As a result of this investigation, assets totaling over $80 million have been seized, including residential and commercial real estate, financial accounts, currency, gold coins, jewelry, vehicles, and aircraft. The subjects of this investigation have been charged with various financial crimes, including money laundering, bank fraud, wire fraud, operating unlicensed MSBs, loan fraud, racketeering, and others. Several of the targets have pled guilty and are awaiting sentencing, while others are awaiting extradition or remain fugitives.
 
State and Local Law Enforcement:  Nassau County Police Department
Nassau County Police officials launched the investigation into their subject after becoming aware of a high volume of cash deposits into the subject’s account, followed by large international wire transfers to construction equipment companies located in Asia and Europe. Subsequent financial data provided investigators with invaluable information in pursuit of their subjects.
Investigators determined that on many occasions, financial institutions closed the account relationships with the subject based on his account activity, and the subject then simply moved his illicit activity to another bank. Nassau County PD officials determined that the subject maintained over 50 personal and business accounts with 9 different banks in the names of various shell companies, as well as his own name. Financial data indicated that the subject made over $9 million in cash deposits, nearly all of which was wired out of the country to the aforementioned international beneficiaries.
Investigators determined that the source of the bulk cash was a trade-based money laundering operation run by the owner of a construction equipment company out of Guyana. The subject would meet associates of the company owner at various locations in and around New York City to collect the cash ranging in amounts between $300,000 and $1.7 million. He would then receive instructions via text message from a co-conspirator indicating where to wire the funds.
Coordination with DEA officials led to the discovery that this was a trade-based money laundering scheme designed to launder the proceeds of illegal narcotics transactions. Numerous sources indicated that the individuals conducting the cash drops to the primary subject were members of a drug trafficking organization out of New York, who received cocaine smuggled via frozen fish from Guyana into the United States.
The owner of the Guyana-based construction equipment company and his co-conspirators were arrested and charged with money laundering. The nearly 2-year investigation included complex financial analysis, physical surveillance, a pen-register, wire taps, and interviews, and resulted in the indictment of two of the subject’s shell corporations and fines totaling a $8.5 million.
-----
UPDATE [7/16/18]: Click on the links below to view the other nominations for each category.
• Third Party Money Launderers
• Transnational Organized Crime
• Transnational Security Threats
• Cyber Threats
• Significant Fraud
• SAR Review Task Force
• State or Local Law Enforcement
 
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.


Financial Institution

Casinos
Depository Institutions
Insurance Industry
Money Services Businesses
Mortgage Co/Broker
Precious Metals/Jewelry Industry
Securities and Futures




Content
Content



Advisory Information



Risk in Real Estate Advisory_FINAL 508 Tuesday (002).pdf305.23 KB

FIN-2017-A003

Issued Date
August 22, 2017



Subject
Advisory to Financial Institutions and Real Estate Firms and Professionals




Drug traffickers, corrupt officials, money launderers, and other criminals seek to exploit real estate transactions to hide their illicit profits, conceal their identities, and launder funds.
This Advisory should be shared with:

Real Estate Professionals


Organization Executives


Comptroller/Treasury/ Accounting Departments


Compliance Departments


Legal Departments

The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) is issuing this advisory to provide financial institutions and the real estate industry with information on money laundering risks associated with certain real estate transactions. As highlighted by recent Geographic Targeting Orders (GTOs) issued by FinCEN, real estate transactions involving luxury property purchased through shell companies—particularly when conducted with cash and no financing—can be an attractive avenue for criminals to launder illegal proceeds while masking their identities.1
Each type of financial institution—defined by law to also include “persons involved in real estate closings and settlements”—has certain anti-money laundering obligations and can provide valuable reporting on potential money laundering and terrorist financing.2 While real estate brokers, escrow agents, title insurers, and other real estate professionals are not required to, FinCEN encourages them to voluntarily report suspicious transactions involving real estate purchases and sales. As with other financial institutions under the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), a safe harbor from liability exists with respect to the filing of suspicious activity reports, including voluntary ones, by persons involved in real estate closings and settlements.3
Money Laundering Risks in the Real Estate Sector
Real estate transactions and the real estate market have certain characteristics that make them vulnerable to abuse by illicit actors seeking to launder criminal proceeds. For example, many real estate transactions involve high-value assets, opaque entities, and processes that can limit transparency because of their complexity and diversity. In addition, the real estate market can be an attractive vehicle for laundering illicit gains because of the manner in which it appreciates in value, “cleans” large sums of money in a single transaction, and shields ill-gotten gains from market instability and exchange-rate fluctuations.4  For these reasons and others, drug traffickers, corrupt officials, and other criminals can and have used real estate to conceal the existence and origins of their illicit funds.
Example: Corruption and Residential Real Estate
A high-profile case illustrating money laundering risks in the real estate sector involves 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB), a Malaysian sovereign wealth fund. In 2016, the U.S. Department of Justice sought forfeiture of over $1 billion in assets—including luxury real estate—associated with funds stolen by corrupt foreign officials from 1MDB. This included a hotel, two homes, and a mansion in Beverly Hills, CA; a home in Los Angeles, CA; a condominium, two apartments, and a penthouse in New York, NY; and, a townhouse in London, England; all with a collected value estimated at approximately $315 million.
This money laundering risk in the real estate market was a principal driver of FinCEN’s decision to issue GTOs, which, as described below, have provided greater insight into illicit finance risks in the high-end real estate market. FinCEN’s analysis of BSA and GTO reported data, law enforcement information, and real estate deed records, as depicted by the case studies in this advisory, indicates that high-value residential real estate markets are vulnerable to penetration by foreign and domestic criminal organizations and corrupt actors, especially those misusing otherwise legitimate limited liability companies or other legal entities to shield their identities. In addition, when these transactions are conducted without any financing (i.e., “all-cash”), they can potentially avoid traditional anti-money laundering (AML) measures adopted by lending financial institutions, presenting increased risk.
FinCEN encourages both financial institutions subject to mandatory suspicious reporting requirements, as well as real estate professionals filing voluntary suspicious activity reports, to keep the risks detailed below in mind when identifying and reporting suspicious transactions.
Use of Shell Companies Decreases Transparency
Criminals launder money to obscure the illicit origin of their funds. To this end, money launderers can use a number of vehicles to reduce the transparency of their transactions. One such vehicle, highlighted in the below case study, is the use of shell companies. Shell companies are typically non-publicly traded corporations, limited liability companies (LLCs), or trusts that have no physical presence beyond a mailing address and generate little to no independent economic value.5 Most shell companies are formed by individuals and businesses for legitimate purposes, such as to hold stock or assets of another business entity or to facilitate domestic and international currency trades, asset transfers, and corporate mergers. Shell companies can often be formed without disclosing the individuals that ultimately own or control them (i.e., their beneficial owners) and can be used to conduct financial transactions without disclosing their true beneficial owners’ involvement. Criminals abuse this anonymity to mask their identities, involvement in transactions, and origins of their wealth, hindering law enforcement efforts to identify individuals behind illicit activity.6
Example: Drug Trafficking, Luxury Real Estate, and Shell Companies
An example of abuse of the luxury real estate sector involves current Venezuelan Vice President Tareck El Aissami and his frontman Samark Lopez Bello. The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) designated El Aissami under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act for playing a significant role in international narcotics trafficking. Lopez Bello was designated for providing material assistance, financial support, or goods or services in support of the international narcotics trafficking activities of, and acting for or on behalf of, El Aissami.7 In addition, OFAC designated shell companies tied to Lopez Bello that were used to hold real estate.8 Lopez Bello is tied to significant property and other assets, which were also blocked as a result of OFAC’s action.
The misuse of shell companies to launder money is a systemic concern for law enforcement and regulatory agencies, but it is of particular concern in the “all-cash” segment of the real estate market, which currently has fewer AML protections.
Use of “All-Cash” Real Estate Purchases Further Decreases Transparency
Criminals can use all-cash purchases to make payments in full for properties and evade scrutiny—on themselves and the origin of their wealth—that is regularly performed by financial institutions in transactions involving mortgages.9 All-cash transactions account for nearly one in four residential real estate purchases, totaling hundreds of billions of dollars nationwide, and are particularly exposed to abuse.10 All-cash transactions account for an even larger stake in some U.S. markets.    For instance, nearly 50 percent of residential real estate sales in Miami-Dade County were all-cash transactions in 2015 and 2016.11 Many all-cash transactions are routine and legitimate, however, they also present significant opportunities for exploitation by illicit actors.
Example: Fraud, Money Laundering, and All-Cash Purchases
An example highlighting fraud and money laundering through all-cash transactions involves real estate agent Anthony Keslinke, who in 2016 was jailed, ordered to pay $1,427,916 in restitution to victims, and forfeited $3,808,831. Keslinke was the leader of both a large-scale bank fraud conspiracy and a separate money laundering conspiracy. Between 2011 and 2014, Keslinke used straw buyers and altered records and documents to purchase real estate with cash throughout Northern California, which he then resold at significant financial gain.12
FinCEN’s Geographic Targeting Orders (GTOs)
In 2016 and 2017, FinCEN issued GTOs to better understand the vulnerabilities presented by the use of shell companies to engage in all-cash residential real estate transactions. A GTO is an order issued by FinCEN under the BSA that imposes additional recordkeeping or reporting requirements on financial institutions or other businesses in a specific geographic area.13 In this case, FinCEN issued GTOs requiring certain U.S. title insurance companies to record and report information, including beneficial ownership, about legal entities used to make non-financed purchases of high-value residential real estate in seven major U.S. geographic areas.14
As of May 2, 2017, over 30 percent of the real estate transactions reported under the GTOs involved a beneficial owner or purchaser representative that had been the subject of unrelated Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) filed by U.S. financial institutions. In other words, the beneficial owners or purchaser representatives in a significant portion of transactions reported under the GTO had been previously connected to a wide array of suspicious activities, including:

A beneficial owner suspected of being connected to over $140 million in suspicious financial activity since 2009 and who sought to disguise true ownership of related accounts.


Two beneficial owners (husband and wife) involved in a $6 million purchase of two condominiums were named in nine SARs fi from 2013 – 2016 in connection with allegations of corruption and bribery associated with South American government contracts.


A beneficial owner suspected of being connected to a network of individuals and shell companies that received over $6 million in wire transfers with no clear business purpose from entities in South America. Much of these funds were used for payments to various real estate related businesses.


Eleven SARs filed from 2008 through 2015 named either the buyer (an LLC), beneficial owner, or purchaser’s representative involved in a GTO-reported $4 million purchase of a residential unit. Law enforcement records indicate that both the purchaser’s representative and his business associate were associated with a foreign criminal organization involved in narcotics smuggling, money laundering, health care fraud, and the illegal export of automobiles.

Review of U.S. Anti-Money Laundering Regulations in the Real Estate Sector
The real estate sector is one of many within the U.S. economy for which anti-money laundering (AML) safeguards have been established to protect the U.S. financial system.15 More specifically, covered financial institutions—including depository institutions, loan or finance companies, and housing government-sponsored enterprises like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—generally have obligations to establish AML programs, report suspicious activity to FinCEN using Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs), and understand their customers and their source of wealth. In addition, beginning in May 2018, many financial institutions will be required to implement customer due diligence obligations and collect beneficial ownership information on their legal entity customers opening accounts.16 FinCEN provides substantial guidance and information on how to implement these requirements effectively.17
While FinCEN currently has exempted them from these broader obligations, persons involved in real estate closings and settlements do participate in efforts to safeguard the U.S. real estate industry and financial system from money laundering and terrorism financing through their existing AML/CFT requirements.18 They, like all U.S. persons engaged in trade and business, must file reports on transactions in currency and certain monetary instruments involving more than $10,000 (commonly referred to as “Form 8300”).19 They also may be required to annually report on foreign bank and financial accounts they own or control, report the transportation of currency across the U.S. border, and keep associated records, as well as respond to FinCEN-issued GTOs.20 In addition, as other financial institutions under the BSA, persons involved in real estate closings and settlements—which may include real estate brokers, escrow agents, title insurers, and other real estate professionals—can voluntarily report suspicious activity and such disclosures would be protected from liability under the BSA’s safe harbor.
The real estate industry recognizes the seriousness and importance of protecting the U.S. real estate market from abuse. For example, the National Association of Realtors has issued red flags and voluntary guidelines to assist real estate professionals minimize the risk of real estate becoming a vehicle for money laundering.21
Mandatory Reporting of Suspicious Activity
A covered financial institution is required to file a SAR if it knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect a transaction conducted or attempted by, at, or through the financial institution involves funds derived from: illegal activity, attempts to disguise funds derived from illegal activity, is designed to evade regulations promulgated under the BSA, lacks a business or apparent lawful purpose, or involves the use of the financial institution to facilitate criminal activity.22
Voluntary Reporting of Suspicious Activity
SARs play an important role in assisting law enforcement to combat crime as they identify possible illicit activity and criminals. FinCEN encourages persons involved in real estate closings and settlements—which may include real estate brokers, escrow agents, title insurers, and other real estate professionals—to voluntarily file a SAR to report any suspicious transactions.23 These persons are well-positioned to identify potentially illicit activity as they have access to a more complete view and understanding of the real estate transaction and of those involved in the transaction. For example, real estate brokers may have greater insight as to the potential purpose for which a property is being purchased or the possible origin of a purchaser’s funds. When reporting suspicious activity, persons involved in real estate closings and settlements should note that they can benefit from protection from civil liability.24
Real estate brokers, escrow agents, title insurers, and other real estate professionals can identify potential suspicious transactions by reviewing available facts and circumstances. Real estate professionals may determine a transaction is suspicious after evaluating whether the real estate transaction:

Lacks economic sense or has no apparent lawful business purpose. Suspicious real estate transactions may include purchases/sales that generate little to no revenue or are conducted with no regard to high fees or monetary penalties;


Is used to purchase real estate with no regard for the property’s condition, location, assessed value, or sale price;


Involves funding that far exceeds the purchaser’s wealth, comes from an unknown origin, or is from or goes to unrelated individuals or companies; or


Is deliberately conducted in an irregular manner. Illicit actors may attempt to purchase property under an unrelated individual’s or company’s name or ask for records (e.g., assessed value) to be altered.
Filing Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)
To report suspicious transactions, financial institutions—including persons involved in real estate closings and settlements—should electronically submit a SAR through FinCEN’s BSA E-Filing System. Additional information on how to complete and file a SAR is available at FinCEN’s public website here.
When filing a mandatory or voluntary SAR involving a real estate transaction, filing a mandatory voluntary SAR involving a real estate transaction, financialinstitutions should provide complete and accurate information, including relevant facts in appropriate SAR fields, and information about the real estate transaction and the circumstances and reasons why such transaction may be suspicious in the narrative section of the SAR.
FinCEN also requests that financial institutions reference this advisory and include the key term
“ADVISORY REAL ESTATE”
in the SAR narrative and in SAR fi 33(z) (Money Laundering-Other) to indicate a connection between the suspicious activity being reported and real estate property.

For Further Information
Additional questions or comments regarding the contents of this advisory should be addressed to the FinCEN Resource Center at FRC@fi , (800) 767-2825 (Option 9), or (703) 905-3591  (Option 9). Financial institutions wanting to report suspicious transactions that may potentially relate to terrorist activity should call the Financial Institutions Toll-Free Hotline at (866) 556- 3974 (7 days a week, 24 hours a day). The purpose of the hotline is to expedite the delivery of this information to law enforcement. Financial institutions should immediately report any imminent threat to local-area law enforcement officials.
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.
 

1. Although FinCEN to date has focused on residential real estate, money laundering can also involve commercial real estate transactions.
2. FinCEN—a bureau of the U.S. Department of the Treasury—administers and issues regulations pursuant to the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The BSA is the commonly used term for statutory enactments requiring U.S. financial institutions to assist U.S. government agencies to detect and prevent money laundering, terrorism finance, and other illegal activity. The BSA’s definition of “financial institution” includes “persons involved in real estate closings and settlements.” 31 U.S.C. § 5312(a)(2)(U). While that term has not yet been defined under FinCEN’s regulations, it is not intended to include individual buyers and sellers.
3. See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g)(3).
4. Money laundering is a crime orchestrated to conceal the source of illegal proceeds so that the money can be used without detection of its criminal source. Visit www.fincen.gov for further information.
5. For further information on shell companies, see FinCEN Guidance FIN-2006-G014 “Potential Money Laundering Risks Related to Shell Companies” (November 2006) and FinCEN’s SAR Activity Review Trends, Tips, and Issues: Issue 1 (October 2000), Issue 2 (June 2001), and Issue 7 (August 2004).
6. In May 2018, many financial institutions will be required to implement customer due diligence obligations and collect beneficial ownership information on their legal entity customers at account opening. See, 81 Fed. Reg. 91 (May 2016).
7. See “Treasury Sanctions Prominent Venezuelan Drug Trafficker Tareck El Aissami and His Primary Frontman Samark Lopez Bello” (February 2017).
8. Id. Generally, under U.S. law, the assets and accounts of a designated individual, entity, or country must be frozen or blocked by U.S. individuals or entities.
9. The BSA and FinCEN regulation generally require covered financial institutions—including those providing financing—to conduct diligence on their customers and their source of wealth.
10. The National Association of Realtors (NAR) consistently reports monthly figures on all-cash sales for existing homes to near 25 percent. See http://www.realtor.org/topics/existing-home-sales.
11. See the Miami Association of Realtors’ 2016 Yearly Market Summaries for Single Family Homes and Townhouses and Condos.
12. See the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) “Examples of Money Laundering Investigations – Fiscal Year 2016.”
13. See 31 U.S.C. § 5326(a), 31 CFR § 1010.370, and Treasury Order 180-01.
14. See “GTOs Involving Certain Real Estate Transactions Frequently Asked Questions” (August 2016), “FinCEN Renews Real Estate “GTOs” to Identify High-End Cash Buyers in Six Major Metropolitan Areas” (February 2017), and “FinCEN Targets Shell Companies Purchasing Luxury Properties in Seven Major Metropolitan Areas” (August 2017).
15. 31 U.S.C. § 5318(h) requires financial institutions, including “persons involved in real estate closings and settlements,” to establish an anti-money laundering program that includes, at a minimum: (A) the development of internal policies, procedures, and controls; (B) the designation of a compliance officer; (C) an ongoing employee training program; and (D) an independent audit function to test programs.
16. 81 Fed. Reg. 91 (May 2016).
17. For additional information, see https://www.fincen.gov/resources/financial-institutions/mortgage-co-broker.
18. See FinCEN’s advance notice of proposed rulemaking “Anti-Money Laundering Program Requirements for ‘Persons Involved in Real Estate Closings and Settlements’’’ (April 2003).
19. 31 CFR § 1010.330 (Form 8300). A Form 8300 also may be filed voluntarily for any suspicious transaction, even if the total amount does not exceed $10,000.
20. 31 CFR §§ 1010.350 (FBAR), 1010.340 (CMIR), 1010.430 (recordkeeping), and 1010.370 (GTO).
21.  See “Tips for Spotting Global Money Laundering Schemes” (January 2017) and “Anti-Money Laundering Guidelines for Real Estate Professionals” (November 2012).
22. 31 C.F.R. §§ 1020.320, 1021.320, 1022.320, 1023.320, 1024.320, 1025.320, 1026.320, 1029.320, and 1030.320.
23. For instructions on how to file a SAR with FinCEN see https://www.fincen.gov/resources/filing-information.
24. See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(g)(3)(A). Persons filing SARs should also note that FinCEN protects the confidentiality of such filings.
 



Content



Contact
Steve Hudak 
703-905-3770 



Immediate Release
August 22, 2017


FinCEN Also Publishes Advisory Highlighting Money Laundering Risks and Encouraging Real Estate Professionals to Report Suspicious Activity


WASHINGTON—The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) today announced the issuance of revised Geographic Targeting Orders (GTOs) that require U.S. title insurance companies to identify the natural persons behind shell companies used to pay for high-end residential real estate in seven metropolitan areas.  Following the recent enactment of the Countering America’s Adversaries through Sanctions Act, FinCEN is revising the GTOs to capture a broader range of transactions and include transactions involving wire transfers.  FinCEN also expanded the GTOs to include transactions conducted in the City and County of Honolulu, Hawaii.
In addition, FinCEN today published an Advisory to provide financial institutions and the real estate industry with information on the money laundering risks associated with real estate transactions, including those involving luxury property purchased through shell companies, particularly when conducted without traditional financing.  Such transactions are vulnerable to abuse by criminals seeking to launder illegal proceeds and mask their identities.  The Advisory provides information on how to detect and report these transactions to FinCEN.
“Through this advisory and other outreach to the private sector, FinCEN, industry, and law enforcement will be better positioned to protect the real estate markets from serving as a vehicle to launder illicit proceeds,” said FinCEN Acting Director Jamal El-Hindi.  “FinCEN also thanks Congress for its modification of the Geographic Targeting Order authority, the first use of which will enable FinCEN to collect further information to combat the potential misuse of shell companies to purchase luxury real estate.”  
In January 2016, FinCEN issued GTOs to require U.S. title insurance companies to report beneficial ownership information on legal entities, including shell companies, used to purchase certain luxury residential real estate in Manhattan and Miami—specifically, luxury residential property purchased by a shell company without a bank loan and made at least in part using a cashier’s check or similar instrument.  In July 2016 and February 2017, FinCEN reissued the original GTOs and extended coverage to all boroughs of New York City, two additional counties in the Miami metropolitan area, five counties in California (including Los Angeles, San Francisco, and San Diego), and the Texas county that includes San Antonio. 
Within this narrow scope of real estate transactions covered by the GTOs, FinCEN data indicate that about 30 percent of reported transactions involve a beneficial owner or purchaser representative that was also the subject of a previous suspicious activity report.  This corroborates FinCEN’s concerns about this small segment of the market in which shell companies are used to buy luxury real estate in “all-cash” transactions.  In addition, feedback from law enforcement indicates that the reporting has advanced criminal investigations.  The expanded GTOs will further help law enforcement and inform FinCEN’s future efforts to assess and combat the money laundering risks associated with luxury residential real estate purchases. 
FinCEN appreciates the continued assistance and cooperation of the title insurance companies and the American Land Title Association in protecting the real estate markets from abuse by illicit actors.
Any questions about the Orders should be directed to the FinCEN Resource Center at 800-767-2825.
Frequently asked questions regarding these GTOs are available here.
###
FinCEN’s mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities.



Content
Content



Ott August 2016 Speech.pdf101.06 KB

August 17, 2016



Prepared Remarks of FinCEN Associate Director for Enforcement Thomas Ott
National Title 31 Suspicious Activity & Risk Assessment Conference and Expo
Las Vegas, Nevada
 
Introduction
Good morning. I would like to thank Mindy for the very kind introduction, as well as Jim Dowling, who invited me to speak today. It is a pleasure to be here in Las Vegas to discuss FinCEN’s oversight of casinos and card clubs under the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). I want to also thank every one of you who are on the front lines of BSA compliance. Casinos and card clubs play a critical role in keeping our financial system safe from potential money laundering and terrorist finance. The high level of attendance at this conference and the questions you have raised tells me that the casino industry continues to show a strong interest in developing a deeper understanding about these issues. And, I am very happy to be a part of the discussion.
FinCEN Overview
Let me next provide a brief overview of FinCEN, for those of you who might not be as familiar with our role. As you are aware, FinCEN has had some recent changes in its senior management with the departure my predecessor, Stephanie Brooker, in April of this year, followed by our director, Jennifer Shasky Calvery, at the end of May. Our deputy director, Jamal El-Hindi, is currently the acting director of FinCEN. And, I can assure you that we are continuing our work while we await the announcement of a new director. I can also assure you, that for at least the Enforcement Division, we will continue to follow the same trajectory with respect to our priorities and practices. FinCEN is a bureau of the Treasury Department, and reports to the Undersecretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. With approximately 340 employees, we are relatively small considering our broad responsibilities. Our mission is to safeguard the financial system from illicit use and combat money laundering and promote national security through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of financial intelligence and strategic use of financial authorities. Some of the threats we are focusing on at FinCEN include Mexican drug trafficking organizations, transnational criminal organizations, frauds against U.S. government programs or that are massive in scale, foreign corrupt officials and rogue regimes, terrorist organizations, and proliferators of weapons of mass destruction. These are serious threats to the United States, our people, our businesses, and our communities.
The BSA provides FinCEN with broad supervisory and enforcement authority, allowing FinCEN to impose civil penalties not only against domestic financial institutions, but also against partners, directors, officers, and employees of such entities who themselves participate in misconduct. We do consider potential individual liability. We also have the authority to obtain injunctions against institutions, as well as individuals, that we believe are involved in violations of the BSA.
FinCEN’s enforcement authority extends across the broad range of industries covered by the BSA. In our BSA oversight role, we, of course, focus on compliance in all our regulated industry sectors. But nowhere is FinCEN’s role more important than in those sectors of the financial industry where it is the only Federal regulator with anti-money laundering (AML) enforcement authorities – sectors such as casinos and card clubs.
Partnerships
Since joining FinCEN a little over two years ago, I have gained a deeper understanding of the relevant perspectives and equities that exist across diverse financial sectors. FinCEN is in a novel position as a regulator. It must vigorously enforce the rules that financial institutions (such as casinos and card clubs) are required to follow to guard against money laundering, terrorist finance, and other financial crime. However, FinCEN must also work in partnership with these same financial institutions. In fact, the BSA was created to protect the integrity of the U.S. financial system by leveraging the assistance of financial institutions—like casinos—to make it more transparent and resilient to crime and security threats, and by providing information useful to law enforcement and others to combat such threats.
Public-private partnerships are increasingly important for FinCEN to succeed in its mission, so I hope to impart the value of proactive engagement with the casino industry to combat illicit financial activity. As a former prosecutor and now someone who oversees the FinCEN division that enforces the BSA, I am aware of some of the challenges faced by many of you in fulfilling your obligations under the BSA. Due to their cash intensive nature, casinos and card clubs have historically been susceptible to abuse by certain criminal actors. That type of vulnerability requires significant resources from your institutions to combat threats posed by those who seek to exploit your businesses for illicit purposes.
Now, before I get too far into this presentation, I want to recognize the obvious: casinos and card clubs, like other financial institutions, are increasingly spending time and money to comply with the BSA. And, FinCEN is committed to working with you to maximize our ability to be effective partners. That’s why I would like to have a conversation with you today to discuss FinCEN’s regulatory approach, in general, as well as how it relates specifically to casinos and card clubs. And, while I suspect you may not have all of your questions answered by the end of my presentation, I hope to at least take a few steps towards enhancing your understanding.
My goal today is to 1) provide a brief overview of a few of our recent enforcement actions; 2) dispel certain myths or misconceptions about the filing of Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs); 3) help you to appreciate the immense value of your work to FinCEN and law enforcement; and 4) give you some insight into our regulatory enforcement process by outlining some of the factors we consider in determining the amount of our civil money penalties.
Recent Enforcement Actions
With that said, I’d like to start by covering some of our most recent actions in the casino and card club space, as I believe these examples and their underlying facts will help frame my speech today. As my colleagues have stated in prior remarks, we hope that our enforcement actions will not only bring violators into compliance, but will also serve to educate financial institutions and the public. FinCEN takes great care to ensure transparency in our rationale and clearly articulate the facts underlying our actions in our assessments. If you look at our past enforcement actions, and review the facts, you will clearly see why FinCEN took actions in these cases.
In September 2015, FinCEN settled an investigation with a Las Vegas-based casino that agreed to an $8M civil money penalty. Several failures at the casino caused systemic and severe AML compliance deficiencies. In sum, the casino’s compliance program failed to incorporate policies and procedures for its “private gaming salons,” which are reserved for their wealthiest clientele who may gamble millions of dollars in a single visit, and which openly allowed patrons to gamble anonymously. The casino admitted that, despite the elevated money laundering risks present in these salons, they failed to appropriately review their customer’s activities, which allowed some of the most lucrative and riskiest financial transactions to go completely unreported. These salons were marketed through branch offices in the U.S. and abroad, particularly in Asia, but failed to adequately monitor transactions, such as large wire transfers, conducted through these offices for suspicious activity.
This was a significant action not just for the nature and scale of the violations, but also due to terms by which the case was resolved. FinCEN has been committed to ensuring that financial institutions violating the BSA rectify their deficiencies and improve their compliance. In this case, in addition to the civil money penalty, the casino agreed to a remedial framework that committed it to conduct periodic external audits, independent testing, adopt a rigorous training regime, engage in a “look-back” for suspicious transactions, and report to FinCEN on mandated improvements.
In many of FinCEN’s enforcement actions, you’ll see that the financial institution (e.g., casino, card club, bank, or MSB) failed to establish and implement policies and procedures that were appropriately risk-based and reasonably designed to assure and monitor compliance with the BSA—and that failure then snowballed and led to other BSA violations. This strikes at the heart of the theme of this conference, and one of the themes that FinCEN has been emphasizing for years: culture of compliance. The “tone at the top” regarding an institutions’s BSA compliance cascades downward and has a significant impression on staff at all levels of opertations.
Culture of compliance was also an important theme of an assessment that we issued in April 2016. Our investigation found that the casino’s willful and repeated violations stemmed, in part, from significant failures with their culture of compliance. Management repeatedly ignored their compliance officer, and failed to use all available information it collected on its customers to assist with completing its BSA filing obligations, which resulted in repeated failures to file currency transaction reports (CTRs) and SARs. Nor can compliance merely exist on paper; for instance, this institution had a SAR review committee, but it never met. And, in fact, some of its members didn’t even know that they were on the committee. Now, I recognize that there may be different views among compliance officers on whether or not to have a SAR review committee. But, if you choose to go that route, I strongly suggest ensuring members are at least notified that they are on the committee. They should not learn about it the first time from the IRS. These facts, among others, demonstrate that a culture of compliance was clearly lacking for this casino. Should you have questions about promoting a culture of compliance, I encourage you to review our public advisory on the subject that can be found on FinCEN’s website.
Another of the elements that is central to these enforcement actions is the emphasis on violations of a financial institution’s obligation to identify and report suspicious activity. Just last month, FinCEN announced a $2.8 million settlement with a California card club for willful violations of the BSA. This was only the second assessment against a card club in FinCEN’s history—but this action was notable for several other reasons. First, it highlighted the importance of KYC: knowing your customers. Of the SARs filed by this card club over a 20-month period, 80% had at least one unknown subject. Put simply, when you don’t know who is gaming at your casino or card club, complying with your regulatory obligations becomes increasingly difficult. It is imperative that policies and procedures are in place to assist with knowing your customer and meeting your reporting and recordkeeping requirements. The assessment against this card club also stressed the importance of how customers who engage in suspicious activity should be handled by a casino. It highlighted an unknown customer on whom there were 15 SARs filed, and who refused to provide identification on multiple occasions. Nevertheless, this customer was allowed to continue to gamble there without any additional due diligence or further action taken by the card club—despite an independent test that made this very recommendation. This card club put profits before compliance—but it ultimately cost them.
Further, this action also demonstrated the importance of filing quality SARs. The card club in this case would file numerous SARs on customers, but none of these SARs indicated or reflected the fact that the customers in question were prior subjects of SARs or identified patterns of suspicious activity. Including such contextual information is a statutory requirement as part of a casino or card club’s BSA program. This requirement plays a critical role in providing law enforcement with the information they need—which the BSA expressly states as one of the underlying purposes of the SAR provisions. Finally, the action we took in this case continued our practice of establishing a remedial framework to help rectify the deficiencies highlighted in our assessment
That describes three of our most recent casino or card club actions.
The Value of SARs and Common SAR Myths
The importance of SAR filings to law enforcement and regulators cannot be understated, and I think FinCEN’s actions help to emphasize this significance. BSA reports filed by our financial institutions, including casinos and card clubs, provide some of the most important information available to law enforcement and other agencies safeguarding the United States. While, as I have said, there are notable advancements in SAR filings by the gaming industry, there are still challenges we are working to overcome. To assist with this, I’d like to spend some time dispelling some of the common “myths” and misconceptions I have heard with respect to SAR filings.
Myth #1: No one reads the SARs we file.
I can understand the origin of this myth. Everyone wants to know and be sure that their SAR filings are serving their purpose; assisting law enforcement investigations and stopping illicit behavior. There are certainly important reasons for some of the silence on this: SAR confidentiality, law enforcement sensitivities, intelligence concerns, among other reasons all can make it difficult to give feedback on specific filings by financial institutions. However, it bears repeating what both our former Director and my immediate predecessor have stated at conferences in the past: these files don’t go into a “black hole,” but rather are used to confront serious threats. Not every SAR results in a criminal prosecution. But, as a former prosecutor, I routinely used the same BSA data that your casinos and card clubs report to FinCEN to build my cases. We exercised the “enterprise theory” of investigation and prosecution to target entire conspiracies and organizations at all levels—including leadership. Now, in my role at FinCEN, I see how important our partner regulators and stakeholders also view this data.
Taken together, BSA data includes nearly 190 million records and there are around 55,000 added each day. The reporting contributes critical information that is routinely analyzed, resulting in the identification of suspected criminal and terrorist finance activity and the initiation of investigations. Domestically, FinCEN grants more than 10,000 agents, analysts, and investigative personnel from over 350 unique federal, state, and local agencies across the United States with direct access to the reporting. There are approximately 30,000 searches of the BSA data taking place each day.
In addition, more than 100 SAR review teams and financial crimes task forces across the country bring together prosecutors and investigators from different agencies to review BSA reporting related to their geographic area of responsibility and insatiate investigations. Based on prior analysis, it has been determined that, collectively, these teams reviewed approximately 60% of all SARs filed.
Every day, we see the BSA data being used by our law enforcement partners. The FBI reports that in 2015, BSA filings were associated with about 38.1% of its pending drug cases, 31.2% of its pending transnational organized crime cases, 27.3% of its complex financial crime cases, and 14.3% of its international terrorism cases.
For specific examples of the significant role casino SARs play in law enforcement investigations, I would invite you to look at our recent Law Enforcement Awards Ceremony. This ceremony took place in May at the Treasury Department headquarters next to the White House, and a representative of the American Gaming Association participated. One of the award winning cases involved IRS-Criminal Investigation Division using SARs and CTRs to uncover a scheme where a family’s financial advisor corruptly depleted all of the financial resources of an impaired adult for his personal gain. BSA reports from multiple financial institution—including casinos—identified the perpetrator of the scheme, and noted an increase in cash transactions in his personal accounts. Other BSA reports identified unusual cash withdrawals from the victim’s accounts. Investigators used the information provided by the reporting financial institutions to uncover the full magnitude of the scheme and to successfully prosecute the perpetrator. Ultimately, the perpetrator pled guilty to federal charges of money laundering, and wire and mail fraud, and was sentenced to several years of imprisonment and ordered to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars in restitution.
Other examples of where BSA filings contributed to a successful U.S. law enforcement case can be found on our website.
Internationally, FinCEN also facilitates the sharing of information for criminal and terrorism investigations on both a bilateral and multilateral basis through the Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units. The Egmont Group, currently comprised of over 150 member jurisdictions, provides an unparalleled, preexisting platform for the secure exchange of financial intelligence. Egmont members exchange information pursuant to guidelines meant to encourage the widest range of international cooperation and dissemination of financial intelligence while at the same time protecting each jurisdiction’s equities in security, confidentiality, and sovereignty. In response to some recent world events, FinCEN has been called upon to provide any relevant BSA data it has received from financial institutions.
Next, I want to take a moment to tackle a closely related myth that helps further demonstrate the value your SAR and CTR filings play.
Myth #2: Low-dollar SARs are meaningless to law enforcement.
This is a common myth across all financial sectors. And, I think this myth may stem from not fully appreciating or understanding how valuable a complete and accurately filed SAR can be in an investigation. It’s easy to think that filing a SAR on suspicious activity that has a low dollar amount, or even on an attempted transaction, may not look like it has the same appeal as one filed on a transaction for millions of dollars, but that is only part of the picture.
What does this mean for your SAR filed on a low-dollar amount transaction? Well, regardless of the amount, the reporting aids in expanding the scope of ongoing investigations by pointing to the identities of previously unknown subjects, exposing accounts and hidden financial relationships, or revealing other information such as common addresses or phone numbers that connect seemingly unrelated participants in a criminal or terrorist organization and, in some cases, even confirming the location of suspects. The reporting—even of transactions involving low dollar amounts—has served to unmask relationships between illicit actors and their financing networks, enabling law enforcement to target the underlying conduct of concern, and to disrupt their ability to operate. Your filing may just be the source of a missing piece of information that is needed in an investigation.
Law enforcement also uses the reporting to identify significant relationships, patterns, and trends. Your filings contribute to a more comprehensive picture that informs our understanding and analysis of criminal typologies. FinCEN includes an Intelligence Division that uses SARs and other reports to conduct strategic analysis to identify new trends and emerging threats in illicit finance. It assesses AML compliance across industries, identifying new illicit finance trends and developing typologies for illicit activity. The Intelligence Division then compiles much of this analysis into finished¬¬ intelligence products that are disseminated across FinCEN, the law enforcement community, and the federal government.
Myth #3: Casinos and Card Clubs are not expected to know a customer’s source of funds.
We hear this one a lot. I touched on it earlier when discussing some of FinCEN’s recent enforcement actions. And, in fact, I believe that FinCEN has been clear about the expectations in this area. In a 2014 speech to casinos and card clubs right here in Las Vegas, our former Director, Jennifer Shasky Calvery, explicitly stated that “casinos are required to be aware of a customer’s source of funds under current AML requirements.”
But this requirement goes beyond a speech given by FinCEN—the regulations themselves support this statement. Casinos and card clubs are required to develop and maintain a robust risk-based AML program. And, more specifically, the regulations impose an additional requirement that explicitly states that casinos must implement reasonably-designed procedures for “using all available information to determine… the occurrence of any transactions or patterns of transactions required to be reported as suspicious.”
However, please note that this requirement extends beyond your BSA program to your SAR filings as well. Regulations explicitly require casinos and card clubs to file SARs on “funds derived from illegal activity” and funds or assets derived from illegal activity including “ownership, nature, source, location, or control of such funds or assets.” In short, identifying and understanding a customer’s source of funds is not simply a “best practice,” it’s a regulatory expectation that casinos take all reasonable steps to do so.
FinCEN also encourages information sharing with other casinos and financial institutions pursuant to Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT ACT in suspected money laundering and terrorist financing cases. It is a voluntary program that can assist in helping casinos and card clubs obtain missing information to meet their regulatory obligations. Section 314(b) provides a safe harbor that offers protections from liability. When a financial institution notifies FinCEN of its intention to participate in this information sharing program, FinCEN first validates the registration. Once approved, the financial institution is provided access to the most current list of 314(b) participants, which is used by the financial institution to validate that they are sharing with a legitimate participant. Additional information about the 314(b) program can be found on the FinCEN web site.
Myth #4: SARs are subjective; based on the AML program size and risk-appetite of my institution. 
This myth suggests that filing SARs are a matter of opinion, or that it’s relative to the make-up of the institution. But if that were true, then there is no way a financial institution can ever violate the statute—the defense would just be: “in my subjective opinion, that’s not SAR-worthy.” We would be left just to agree to disagree. Obviously, an effective AML system cannot work like that. Similarly, some financial institutions hold on to the myth that their AML program should be based on their risk appetite or risk tolerance. This view may be compounded by the misperception that SAR filings can be proportionally based on the size of an AML program.
These related myths are also contradicted by the rule [31 CFR 1021.320(a)(2)], that says “knows, suspects, or has a reason to suspect” illicit activity. So if you have a reason to suspect it, then you are required to file. It is that simple. Filing SARs does not depend on an AML program’s perceived risk appetite and it cannot be curtailed because of perceived AML program resource deficiencies.
This observation is not meant to spur specious or “defensive” filings; to the contrary, suspicious activity monitoring and SAR filing do require some judgment. Decisions are not always clear-cut. There are going to be times when someone says, “yeah, I think you probably should have filed a SAR, but it was not unreasonable to think otherwise.” If you act reasonably, and do your investigation, and—and this is important—think through and document your reasons for not filing a SAR, then we are not going to second-guess those reasonable decisions, even if FinCEN or an examiner may have made a different decision. However, I must emphasize financial institutions like yours and those of your clients must have appropriate risk-based AML programs in place.
Good News
That concludes my attempt to dispel four common myths about SAR filing. I can step off my soap-box for a moment. Because—the good news is that the casino and card club industry has improved their filing of SARs over the past several years. I want to thank the BSA compliance officers here today for being part of this positive change.
Generally, I do not like to throw out a lot statistics. But, I believe FinCEN’s records show dramatic increases in SAR filings for casinos and card clubs since 2013. This trend continued into 2015—increasing by 16%. SAR filings in the first reportable months of 2016 also appear to continue this upward trend. Notably, these increases have occurred industry-wide. We have observed increases in state-licensed casinos, tribal casinos, and card clubs.
Based on data you provided us, the highest reported categories of suspicious activity by your industry in 2015 are—again, as they were in 2014—minimal gaming and altering transactions to avoid CTR filing, whether by structuring or other means. We have also noticed “emerging trends” involving suspicious activity in the areas of “Recorded Play with no Recorded Redemption” and “Unknown Chip Source.” Over the same years, SARs filed by casinos mentioning “Chip Walking” increased significantly as did SARs filed by casinos mentioning “Rated Play Which Does Not Support the Amount of Chips Redeemed.” You should also know that this data is all available on our website’s “SAR Stats” feature, which allows you to see filing trends and run reports specific to an industry or region.
Civil Monetary Penalties
In the final portion of my presentation, I want to now provide additional clarity about how FinCEN assesses the amount of civil monetary penalties (CMPs). I hope to provide some greater insight to our CMP process to better inform you and your colleagues.
FinCEN does not maintain a strict matrix for assessing penalties. Rather, FinCEN weighs a number of factors and considerations when determining CMPs. I believe that overall, this model promotes greater fairness and proportionality in our enforcement actions. At its broadest level, this approach allows FinCEN the flexibility to move beyond a “one-size fits all” approach to tailor penalties to appropriately reflect the nature of the violation. And, it works to provide parity with CMPs imposed in similar cases. As I mentioned earlier, we devote a tremendous amount of time to ensuring that our public enforcement assessments clearly explain the nature of the violations underlying our enforcement action. The rationale should, in most instances, be evident.
I would like to spend some time discussing these factors to give you a better sense of how FinCEN arrives at a CMP.
1) The Nature and Seriousness of Violations
This is fairly obvious. FinCEN will consider the nature and seriousness of the violations in assessing an appropriate penalty or other relief. This factor involves both a qualitative and a quantitative analysis. For example, what elements of a BSA program are deficient or missing? A financial institution that has significant deficiencies in multiple program pillars over an extended period of time may be in a different position than an institution that has failed to comply with a single program area for a short period of time. Importantly, FinCEN’s consideration of the nature and seriousness of violations may play a critical role in determining what, if any, corrective actions—or undertakings—may need to occur to remedy existing errors.
2) Knowledge and Intent 
Of course, willfulness is an element in all BSA cases. Financial institutions or individuals that cause AML deficiencies by recklessly failing to comply with their obligations under the BSA, or turn a blind eye to compliance deficiencies will be considered to have acted willfully for the resulting violations.
In some instances, we have seen cases where an employee or officer of the institution has been complicit in illicit transactions, or the institution has had direct notice of ongoing money laundering or BSA violations but allowed it to continue. For example, prior exam findings, or receipt of a grand jury subpoena. Cases in which the IRS examiners have found repeat violations over multiple exams receive heightened scrutiny from FinCEN and tend to be subject to greater penalties. However, this does not mean that a clean exam, or one with few findings, will never result in a CMP. Your IRS examiner is an important source of information on whether your casino’s AML program is on the right track. We are also aware of disturbing instances in which our IRS examiners were denied access to critical information and key personnel during the exam process. Obviously, obstructing the examination process and failing to address repeated violations are heavily weighted factors that we consider in enforcement actions and penalty determinations. In such a case—or where the deficiencies or illegal activities are only discovered through examination or law enforcement investigation—it is likely a higher CMP will be imposed.
In contrast, a violator’s decision to self-disclose the wrongdoing in a timely manner may indicate a willingness to accept responsibility; it may also suggest a stronger likelihood of future compliance. FinCEN may consider the degree to which a financial institution or individual has cooperated with FinCEN, examiners, or law enforcement. A strong level of cooperation may be a mitigating factor in determining a penalty. Such cooperation includes, but is not limited to, the subject’s compliance with document requests, professionalism towards and cooperation with examiners, and being fully truthful and forthcoming during interviews.
3) Remedial Measures
FinCEN’s enforcement actions have begun to focus more specifically on how financial institutions can work to correct the errors identified in our investigations. Some of our enforcement actions have included “undertakings” that aim to ensure that the financial institution rectifies identified problems. For example, we may insist on corporate monitor arrangements as part of our enforcement settlements. Our enforcement undertakings may require a casino to have more stringent independent testing for a given period of time, demonstrated training improvements, or updates to their written policies and procedures. Additionally, if specific concerns arise over transactions, FinCEN may require a SAR look-back as part of the consent order as well. These undertakings serve as a way to remedy any potential violations and ensure that future issues do not arise. Accordingly, FinCEN may consider a lower penalty relating to situations in which the institution takes effective, immediate remedial action after a violation is revealed. However, remedial measures alone may not warrant a reduced penalty. For example, if it is determined that an entity had disregarded its compliance program, caused significant violations, and then seeks to offset its penalty payments with compliance expenditures it should have made at the outset.
4) Financial Condition of the Financial Institution or Individual 
FinCEN may consider a financial institution’s size and financial condition, including its assets, income, and projected revenue when determining an appropriate penalty that will be sufficient to ensure future compliance without jeopardizing the solvency of the financial institution. Similarly, in cases against individuals, FinCEN may consider the person’s assets and income when considering the penalty amount. This is a factor that would not be reflected in our public assessments, as we keep such information confidential.
5) Payments and Penalties Related to Other Enforcement Actions
Other civil, regulatory, or criminal agencies (state or federal) may sometimes impose a fine, penalty, or other financial assessment against a subject for other violations stemming from conduct that is similar or related to the conduct that gave rise to the BSA violations. Penalties imposed by other agencies should always be considered in analyzing a proposed civil money penalty by FinCEN. Significantly, however, such penalties may—but will not necessarily—affect the size of the penalty that FinCEN decides to impose. And, generally, FinCEN will not agree to have its CMP be completely concurrent with that of another federal or state agency.
6) Other Factors
The factors and considerations are non-exhaustive, which is why I believe FinCEN’s approach to determine a CMP works better than a matrix. There may be other circumstances not described above, which might call for a larger or smaller penalty. Also, it would be unusual for all factors to apply in any given case. Similarly, several factors may overlap, or there may be instances where one factor is more significant than others and should receive greater weight. Regardless of the situation, I can assure you this: there is a process in place to provide your institution an opportunity to be heard. When you receive notice of a FinCEN enforcement action, you and your institution will be invited to present the Enforcement Division with any information you feel is relevant to the determination of a CMP. We will fully consider and evaluate the information, and be prepared to discuss our positions. Open dialogue is mutually beneficial. We want our Assessments to be factually accurate based on the evidence, and the CMP to be fair and appropriate. However, when we propose a certain CMP amount, it is usually pretty firm—all factors have been fully considered and vetted. It is not like buying a used car—we do not start high in anticipation that you will come in low with a counteroffer. There is no “walk to the middle.”
Now that I have gone through the factors that inform a CMP, I want to emphasize the importance of building and sustaining a culture of compliance in your respective institutions. From an enforcement perspective, most of the CMP factors lead back to one single point of failure—a failed compliance culture. How this failure reveals itself in an investigation may differ from institution to institution, but the core breakdown is the same. This suggests to me that each institution should engage in some honest self-examination and ask itself whether its culture of compliance is merely lip service or whether it is real. We are seeing some meaningful improvements, but more work still needs to be done. I believe that it can be done but it will take real, sustained commitment.
Conclusion
So I recognize that I have covered a lot of issues today about FinCEN’s engagement with the casino industry, the industry’s obligations under the BSA, some common misperceptions about our work, as well as FinCEN’s enforcement posture. I hope this information will be useful to you and your colleagues in the casino industry to better understand and fulfill your obligations under the BSA to implement appropriate compliance programs at your respective institutions.
FinCEN is a critical partner in the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. Our talented and dedicated team is committed to that mission. We have an incredible opportunity to serve the American public and to contribute to the safety of this country. FinCEN will meet the challenges ahead working together with you, law enforcement, and our regulatory and foreign partners. We see casinos and card clubs as important partners in our efforts and I hope that you see us that way as well.
I look forward to answering your questions about FinCEN and the work of our Enforcement Division. But, first, I would like to remind everyone that our website, fincen.gov, has a wealth of information and resources that can help you learn more about FinCEN, with links to enforcement actions, guidance, answers to frequently asked questions and more. Similarly, I encourage you to reach out to the FinCEN Resource Center at 1-800-767-2825 or FRC@fincen.gov if you ever have questions about your regulatory requirements. I would like to conclude my presentation where I began by thanking each and every one of you for doing your part to protect the financial system from abuse by illicit actors. We cannot do our work without the help from industry, so we value your sustained commitment. Thank you.



Content


PDF

guidance04262005.pdf1.03 MB



Issued Date
April 26, 2005



Guidance Subject
Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Providing Banking Services to Money Services Businesses Operating in the United States

The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (“FinCEN”), along with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision (collectively, the “Federal Banking Agencies”), issue this interpretive guidance to clarify further the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and its implementing regulations (including the parallel provisions issued by the Federal Banking Agencies) for banking organizations when providing banking services to money services businesses operating in the United States.
As a follow-up to the joint statement issued on March 30, 2005, this guidance sets forth the minimum steps that banking organizations should take when providing banking services to money services businesses. Additionally, this guidance provides assistance to banking organizations in assessing and minimizing the risk of money laundering posed by individual money services business customers. While banking organizations are expected to manage risk associated with all accounts, including money services business accounts, banking organizations will not be held responsible for their customers’ compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
By clarifying our expectations, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies are confirming that banking organizations have the flexibility to provide services to a wide range of money services businesses while remaining in compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. This guidance will be reflected in the forthcoming interagency Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering examination procedures.
Concurrent with this document, FinCEN is also issuing guidance to money services businesses to emphasize their Bank Secrecy Act regulatory obligations and to notify them of the type of information that they may be expected to produce to a banking organization in the course of opening or maintaining an account relationship. Through regular supervisory processes and through dissemination of additional information, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies will continue to provide guidance to assist banking organizations on issues related to money services businesses, such as providing indicators to banking organizations that would help in identifying entities that may be operating as money services businesses when those entities have not disclosed the nature of their business to the banking organizations and guidance on appropriate due diligence when maintaining accounts for foreign providers of money services.
Background
Under existing Bank Secrecy Act regulations, FinCEN has defined money services businesses to include five distinct types of financial services providers and the U.S. Postal Service: (1) currency dealers or exchangers; (2) check cashers; (3) issuers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value; (4) sellers or redeemers of traveler's checks, money orders, or stored value; and (5) money transmitters. There is a threshold requirement for businesses in the first four categories – a business that engages in such transactions will not be considered a money services business if it does not engage in such transactions in an amount greater that $1,000 for any person on any day in one or more transactions. See 31 CFR 103.11(uu).
With limited exceptions, money services businesses are subject to the full range of Bank Secrecy Act regulatory controls, including the anti-money laundering program rule, suspicious activity and currency transaction reporting rules, and various other identification and recordkeeping rules.1 Additionally, existing FinCEN regulations require certain money services business principals to register with FinCEN.2 Many money services businesses, including the vast majority of money transmitters in the United States, operate through a system of agents. While agents are not presently required to register with FinCEN, they are themselves money services businesses that are required to establish anti-money laundering programs and comply with the other recordkeeping and reporting requirements described above. Finally, many states have established anti-money laundering supervisory requirements, often including the requirement that a money services business be licensed with the state in which it is incorporated or does business.
The money services business industry is extremely diverse, ranging from Fortune 500 companies with numerous outlets worldwide to small, independent “mom and pop” convenience stores in communities with population concentrations that do not necessarily have access to traditional banking services or in areas where English is rarely spoken.
The range of products and services offered, and the customer bases served by money services businesses, are equally diverse. In fact, while they all fall under the definition of a money services business, the types of businesses are quite distinct. In addition, many money services businesses only offer money services as an ancillary component to their primary business, such as a convenience store that cashes checks or a hotel that provides currency exchange. Other money services businesses offer a variety of services, such as check cashing and stored value card sales.
I. Minimum Bank Secrecy Act Due Diligence Expectations
FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies expect banking organizations that open and maintain accounts for money services businesses to apply the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act, as they do with all accountholders, on a risk-assessed basis. As with any category of accountholder, there will be money services businesses that pose little risk of money laundering and those that pose a significant risk. It is essential that banking organizations neither define nor treat all money services businesses as posing the same level of risk. Put simply, a local grocer that also cashes payroll checks for customers purchasing groceries cannot be equated with a money transmitter specializing in cross-border wire transfers to jurisdictions posing heightened risk for money laundering or the financing of terrorism, and therefore the Bank Secrecy Act obligations on a banking organization will differ significantly.3
Registration with FinCEN, if required, and compliance with any state-based licensing requirements represent the most basic of compliance obligations for money services businesses; a money services business operating in contravention of registration or licensing requirements would be violating Federal and possibly state laws.4 As a result, it is reasonable and appropriate for a banking organization to insist that a money services business provide evidence of compliance with such requirements or demonstrate that it is not subject to such requirements.
Based on existing Bank Secrecy Act requirements applicable to banking organizations, the minimum due diligence expectations associated with opening and maintaining accounts for money services businesses are:
Apply the banking organization’s Customer Identification Program;5
Confirm FinCEN registration, if required;
Confirm compliance with state or local licensing requirements, if applicable;
Confirm agent status, if applicable; and
Conduct a basic Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering risk assessment to determine the level of risk associated with the account and whether further due diligence is necessary.
The Appendix to this guidance explains FinCEN’s registration and state-based licensing requirements and outlines steps that banking organizations can take to confirm and document the registration, licensing, or agent status of a money services business.
Basic Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering Risk Assessment
While the extent to which banking organizations should perform further due diligence beyond the minimum compliance obligations set forth above will be dictated by the level of risk posed by the individual customer, it is not the case that all money services businesses will always require further due diligence. In some cases, no further customer due diligence will be required. In other situations, the further due diligence required will be extensive. In all cases, the level of due diligence applied will be dictated by the risks associated with the particular customer.
Accordingly, as with any business account, in determining how much, if any, further due diligence would be required for any money services business customer, the banking organization should consider the following basic information:
• Types of products and services offered by the money services business
In order to properly assess risks, banking organizations should know the categories of money services engaged in by the particular money services business accountholder. In addition, banking organizations should determine whether the money services business is a “principal” (with a fleet of agents) or is itself an agent of another money services business. Other relevant considerations include whether or not the money services business is a new or established operation, and whether or not money services are the customer’s primary or ancillary business (such as a grocery store that derives a small fraction of its overall revenue from cashing checks).
• Location(s) and market(s) served by the money services business
Money laundering risks within a money services business can vary widely depending on the locations, customer bases, and markets served by the money services business. Relevant considerations include whether markets served are domestic or international, or whether services are targeted to local residents or broad markets. For example, a convenience store that only cashes payroll checks generally presents lower money laundering risks than a check casher that cashes any type of third-party check or cashes checks for commercial enterprises (which generally involve larger amounts).
• Anticipated account activity
Banking organizations should ascertain the expected services that the money services business will use, such as currency deposits or withdrawals, check deposits, or funds transfers. For example, a money services business may operate out of one location and use one branch of the banking organization, or may have several agents making deposits at multiple branches throughout the banking organization’s network. Banking organizations should also have a sense of expected transaction amounts.
• Purpose of the account
Banking organizations should understand the purpose of the account for the money services business. For example, a money transmitter might require the bank account to remit funds to its principal U.S. clearing account or may use the account to remit funds cross-border to foreign-based agents.
Risk Indicators
To further assist banking organizations in determining the level of risk posed by a money services business customer, set forth below are examples that may be indicative of lower and higher risk, respectively. In determining the level of risk, a banking organization should not take any single indicator as determinative of the existence of lower or higher risk. Moreover, the application of these factors is fact-specific, and a conclusion regarding an account should be based on a consideration of available information. An effective risk assessment should be a composite of multiple factors, and depending upon the circumstances, certain factors may be weighed more heavily than others.
Examples of potentially lower risk indicators: The money services business –
primarily markets to customers that conduct routine transactions with moderate frequency in low amounts;
offers only a single line of money services business product (for example, only check cashing or only currency exchanges);
is a check casher that does not accept out of state checks;
is a check casher that does not accept third-party checks or only cashes payroll or government checks;
is an established business with an operating history;
only provides services such as check cashing to local residents;
is a money transmitter that only remits funds to domestic entities; or
only facilitates domestic bill payments.
Examples of potentially higher risk indicators: The money services business –
allows customers to conduct higher-amount transactions with moderate to high frequency;
offers multiple types of money services products;
is a check casher that cashes any third-party check or cashes checks for commercial businesses;
is a money transmitter that offers only, or specializes in, cross-border transactions, particularly to jurisdictions posing heightened risk for money laundering or the financing of terrorism or to countries identified as having weak anti-money laundering controls;6
is a currency dealer or exchanger for currencies of jurisdictions posing heightened risk for money laundering or the financing of terrorism or countries identified as having weak anti-money laundering controls;
is a new business without an established operating history; or
is located in an area designated as a High Risk Money Laundering and Related Financial Crimes Area or a High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Area.7
II. Due Diligence for Higher Risk Customers
A banking organization’s due diligence should be commensurate with the level of risk of the money services business customer identified through its risk assessment. If a banking organization’s risk assessment indicates potential for a heightened risk of money laundering or terrorist financing, it will be expected to conduct further due diligence in a manner commensurate with the heightened risk. This is no different from requirements applicable to any other business customer and does not mean that a banking organization cannot maintain the account.
Depending on the level of perceived risk, and the size and sophistication of the particular money services business, banking organizations may pursue some or all of the following actions as part of an appropriate due diligence review or risk management assessment of a money services business seeking to establish an account relationship. Likewise, if the banking organization becomes aware of changes in the profile of the money services business to which banking services are being provided, these additional steps may be appropriate. However, it is not the expectation of FinCEN or the Federal Banking Agencies that banking organizations will uniformly require any or all of the actions identified below for all money services business customers:
review the money services business’s anti-money laundering program;
review results of the money services business’s independent testing of its anti-money laundering program;
conduct on-site visits;
review list of agents, including locations, within or outside the United States, that will be receiving services directly or indirectly through the money services business account;
review written procedures for the operation of the money services business;
review written agent management and termination practices for the money services business; or
review written employee screening practices for the money services business.
As with any other accountholder that is subject to anti-money laundering regulatory requirements, the extent to which a banking organization should inquire about the existence and operation of the anti-money laundering program of a particular money services business will be dictated by the banking organization’s assessment of the risks of the particular relationship. Given the diversity of the money services business industry and the risks they face, banking organizations should expect significant differences among anti-money laundering programs of money services businesses. However, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies do not expect banking organizations to act as the de facto regulators of the money services business industry.
III. Identification and Reporting of Suspicious Activity
Existing regulations require banking organizations to identify and report known or suspected violations of law or/and suspicious transactions relevant to possible violations of law or regulation. Risk-based monitoring of accounts maintained for all customers, including money services businesses, is a key element of an effective system to identify and, where appropriate, report violations and suspicious transactions. The level and frequency of such monitoring will depend, among other things, on the risk assessment and the activity in the account.
Based on the banking organization’s assessment of the risks of its particular money services business customers, monitoring should include periodic confirmation that initial projections of account activity have remained reasonably consistent over time. Account activity would typically include deposits or withdrawals of currency, deposits of checks, or funds transfers. The mere existence of variances does not necessarily mean that a problem exists, but may be an indication that additional review is necessary. Furthermore, risk-based monitoring generally does not include “real-time” monitoring of all transactions flowing through the account of a money services business, such as a review of the payee or drawer of every deposited check.
Examples of potential suspicious activity within money services business accounts, generally involving significant unexplained variations in transaction size, nature, or frequency through the account, include:
A check casher deposits checks from financial institutions in jurisdictions posing heightened risk for money laundering or the financing of terrorism or from countries identified as having weak anti-money laundering controls when the money services business does not overtly market to individuals related to the particular jurisdiction;8
A check casher deposits currency in small denomination bills or unusually large or frequent amounts. Given that a check casher would typically deposit checks and withdraw currency to meet its business needs, any recurring deposits of currency may be an indicator of suspicious activity;
A check casher deposits checks with unusual symbols, stamps, or written annotations either on the face or on the back of the negotiable instruments;
A money transmitter transfers funds to a different jurisdiction than expected, based on the due diligence information that the banking organization had assessed for the particular money services business. For example, if the money transmitter represented to the banking organization or in its business plan that it specializes in remittances to Latin America and starts transmitting funds on a regular basis to another part of the world, the unexplained change in business practices may be indicative of suspicious activity; or
A money transmitter or seller/issuer of money orders deposits currency significantly in excess of expected amounts, based on the due diligence information that the banking organization had assessed for the particular money services business, without any justifiable explanation, such as an expansion of business activity, new locations, etc.
One recurring question has been the obligation of a banking organization to file a suspicious activity report on a money services business that has failed to register with FinCEN or failed to obtain a license under applicable state law. Given the importance of the licensing and registration requirement, a banking organization should file a suspicious activity report if it becomes aware that a customer is operating in violation of the registration or state licensing requirement.9 This approach is consistent with long standing practices of FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies under which banking organizations file suspicious activity reports on known or suspected violations of law or regulation.
Finally, banking organizations are not expected to terminate existing accounts of money services businesses based solely on the discovery that the customer is a money services business that has failed to comply with licensing and registration requirements (although continuing non-compliance by the money services business may be an indicator of heightened risk). There is no requirement in the Bank Secrecy Act regulations that a banking organization must close an account that is the subject of a suspicious activity report. The decision to maintain or close an account should be made by a banking organization’s management under standards and guidelines approved by its board of directors. However, if an account is involved in a suspicious or potentially illegal transaction, the banking organization should examine the status and history of the account thoroughly and should determine whether or not the institution is comfortable maintaining the account. If the banking organization is aware that the reported activity is under investigation, it is strongly recommended that the banking organization notify law enforcement before making any decision regarding the status of the account.
IV. Existing Accounts for Known Money Services Businesses
This guidance is not a directive to banking organizations to conduct immediately a review of existing accounts for known money services businesses for the sole purpose of determining licensing or registration status. However, the guidance does not affect a banking organization’s existing anti-money laundering compliance program obligations to assess risk, including periodic risk assessments of existing money services business accounts to update risk factors such as licensing and registration status.
V. 314(b) Voluntary Information Sharing
Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 allows certain financial institutions, after providing notice to FinCEN, to voluntarily share information with each other for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting possible money laundering or terrorist financing under protection of legal safe harbor.10
Banks and money services businesses can utilize Section 314(b) information sharing to work together to identify money laundering and terrorist financing. While participation in the 314(b) information sharing program is voluntary, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies encourage banking organizations and their money services business customers to consider how voluntary information sharing could enable each institution to more effectively discharge its anti-money laundering and suspicious activity monitoring obligation.
Any banking organizations that have questions on this guidance are encouraged to contact FinCEN or their primary federal regulator.
Additional Resources
• www.msb.gov – FinCEN website dedicated to money services business regulations and guidance, such as FinCEN rulings and answers to frequently asked questions. This website also contains a list of registered money services businesses. • Free, easy-to-understand educational materials to help inform money services businesses about their obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act, available at www.msb.gov, including:
“Quick Reference Guide to Bank Secrecy Act Requirements for Money Services Businesses;”
“Guide to Money Laundering Prevention;”
Posters and “Take One” cards, available in multiple languages and bilingual versions, to inform money services business customers about Bank Secrecy Act requirements and help customers understand why the business must ask for personal information; and
Videos and CD-ROMs, in English and Spanish, with case studies designed to educate money services business employees about the Bank Secrecy Act requirements.
• FinCEN Regulatory Helpline – 800-949-2732 – for questions concerning Bank Secrecy Act requirements. • FinCEN Financial Institutions Hotline – 866-556-3974 – to report suspicious activity that may be related to terrorist financing or ongoing money laundering schemes. • FinCEN Advisory 33, “Informal Value Transfer Systems” (November 2003) (available on the www.fincen.gov website). • “Report to Congress in Accordance with Section 359” of the USA PATRIOT Act concerning Informal Value Transfer Systems, March 2003 (available on the www.fincen.gov website). • Money Transmitter Regulators Association (www.mtraweb.org) - the association of state regulators of the money transmitter industry. • Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (www.federalreserve.gov). • Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (www.fdic.gov) and ( www.fdic.gov/regulations/examinations/bsa). • National Credit Union Administration (www.ncua.gov). • Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (www.helpwithmybank.gov/). • Office of Thrift Supervision (www.ots.treas.gov) and (http://www.ots.treas.gov/resultsort.cfm?catNumber=272&dl=11&edit=1 ).
APPENDIX
Frequently Asked Questions on Providing Banking Services to Money Services Businesses
Registration and Licensing
1. What are the FinCEN registration requirements for Money Services Businesses?
As set forth in 31 CFR 103.41, all money services business must register with FinCEN (whether or not licensed as a money services business by any state) except:
A business that is a money services business solely because it serves as an agent of another money services business;
A business that is a money services business solely as an issuer, seller, or redeemer of stored value;
The U.S. Postal Service; and
Agencies of the United States, of any state, or of any political subdivision of any state.
	A branch office of a money services business is not required to file its own registration form. Those money services businesses required to register must complete and submit to the Internal Revenue Service – Enterprise Computing Center-Detroit a form [www.msb.gov/pdf/msbregform01102004.pdf] that identifies the following: (1) the name, location, and taxpayer identification number of the business; (2) information concerning the owners of the business; (3) the location(s) of operation and the number of branch locations and number of agents; (4) the products and services offered; (5) information about the primary transaction account; and (6) the location of supporting documentation.
Additionally, under existing FinCEN regulations, a money services business has 180 days in which to register from the time that it begins performing the functions that subject it to the money services business regulations.11 Therefore, it is possible that a money services business will appropriately seek banking services before completing the registration process with FinCEN, but still be in full compliance with the law.
2. What resources are available for banking organizations to use to confirm registration or licensing status of a money services business?
Regarding FinCEN registration, a banking organization may rely on the correspondence received by the money services business from the Internal Revenue Service – Enterprise Computing Center-Detroit as confirmation that the money services business has registered with FinCEN. All registered money services businesses will have such correspondence and should be prepared to provide it to the banking organization. Note that it may take 60 days or more after a money services business files its registration form for the business to receive an acknowledgment letter from the Internal Revenue Service. The acknowledgment letter from the Internal Revenue Service will be the only confirmation received by the money services business. As an alternative, if the money services business has filed its registration but has not yet received its acknowledgement letter, the banking organization may rely on a copy of the registration form submitted by the money services business until such time as the money services business either receives its acknowledgement letter or appears on the money services business registration list published by FinCEN (accessible at www.msb.gov). FinCEN seeks to assist banking organizations by assembling, preparing and forwarding information on the money services business industry and applicable Bank Secrecy Act requirements on FinCEN’s website dedicated to the money services business industry, www.msb.gov.
Regarding state licensing requirements, individual state regulatory authorities offer a variety of information. Also, FinCEN is working with state regulators on a variety of information-sharing initiatives that will enhance cooperation with respect to anti-money laundering regulatory issues. One initiative will be to identify and promote resources where banking organizations and others can go to learn about state anti-money laundering requirements applicable to money services businesses as well as the status of individual money services businesses.
3. How can a banking organization confirm that a money services business is an agent that is not required to register with FinCEN?
A money services business that is an agent of a principal money services business will generally have contracts and agreements with the principal money services business, and agents should be expected to provide these documents to a banking organization upon request. Additionally, many large money services businesses list information about their agents on their public web sites.
4. How should a banking organization document its review of registration, licensing, or agent status of a money services business?
Banking organizations should document their review of the applicable registration, licensing, or agent status of a money services business customer, but are not required to maintain copies of actual documentation received from a money services business. Banking organizations should also consider the availability of public information regarding licensing, registration, or agent status for money services businesses. For example, many states make licensing information publicly available, and many large money services businesses list their agents on their public web sites.
Due Diligence
5. After applying the Customer Identification Program, and confirming registration, licensing, and agent status, as applicable, and when a banking organization’s risk assessment of a money services business customer indicates a low risk of money laundering or other illicit activity for the particular customer, is a banking organization required to perform further due diligence?
No. After assessing basic information of a particular money services business customer, including: (1) the products and services offered by the money services business; (2) the locations and markets served by the money services business; (3) anticipated account activity; and (4) purpose of the account, if a banking organization determines that its relationship with the particular money services business constitutes a low risk of money laundering or other illicit activity, a banking organization is not routinely expected to perform further due diligence. Banking organizations should consider and perform further due diligence, such as a review of a money services business’s anti-money laundering program, if the banking organization’s risk assessment of a relationship with a particular money services business indicates heightened risks.
However, banking organizations are reminded that risk-based monitoring of all accounts, regardless of the amount of due diligence performed for a particular customer, is a key element of an effective system to identify, and where appropriate, report suspicious activity. Discovery of suspicious activity in transactions with a money services business initially deemed to represent low risk may necessitate further due diligence.
6. Can a banking organization open or maintain an account for a money services business that has not registered or obtained a state license because the customer was unaware of applicable requirements? Should a banking organization file a suspicious activity report in such instances?
Yes. Banking organizations are not required to refuse to open new accounts for money services businesses that have failed to comply with registration or licensing requirements. Similarly, there is no requirement in the Bank Secrecy Act regulations that a banking organization terminate existing accounts of customers based solely on the discovery that the customer is a money services business that has failed to comply with licensing and registration requirements. The decision to maintain or close an account should be made by a banking organization’s management under standards and guidelines approved by its board of directors.
However, continued noncompliance by a customer with applicable licensing, registration or other regulatory requirements after learning of such requirements would likely be an indicator of heightened risk. Banking organizations should file suspicious activity reports if they become aware that customers are operating in violation of the registration or state licensing requirements.
7. Do FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies have an expectation that banking organizations should educate money services businesses about any requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act?
No. The Bank Secrecy Act does not require, and neither FinCEN nor the Federal Banking Agencies expect, banking organizations to serve as the de facto regulators of the money services businesses for which they maintain accounts. Accordingly, banking organizations are not expected to educate money services businesses about the Bank Secrecy Act requirements that apply to the industry. However, when a banking organization is conducting due diligence with respect to its money services business customers, questions will inevitably arise. In such cases, banking organizations can direct inquiries by money services businesses about applicable Bank Secrecy Act requirements to existing regulatory resources such as www.msb.gov or FinCEN’s Regulatory Helpline at 1-800-949-2732.
In addition, there are several ways for banking organizations to obtain free educational materials produced by FinCEN for money services businesses:
	• Submit an online order form through www.msb.gov (fastest option)• Print an order form from www.msb.gov and fax to 1-800-773-8356 or mail to: Money Services Business Program Office P.O. Box 39 Vienna, VA 22183
Phone an order to 1-800-386-6329

1See 31 CFR 103.125 (requirement for money services businesses to establish and maintain an anti-money laundering program); 31 CFR 103.22 (requirement for money services businesses to file currency transaction reports); 31 CFR 103.20 (requirement for money services businesses to file suspicious activity reports, other than for check cashing and stored value transactions); 31 CFR 103.29 (requirement for money services businesses that sell money orders, traveler’s checks, or other instruments for cash to verify the identity of the customer and create and maintain a record of each cash purchase between $3,000 and $10,000, inclusive); 31 CFR 103.33(f) and (g) (rules applicable to certain transmittals of funds); and 31 CFR 103.37 (additional recordkeeping requirement for currency exchangers including the requirement to create and maintain a record of each exchange of currency in excess of $1,000).
2See 31 CFR 103.41. The registration requirement applies to all money services businesses (whether or not licensed as a money services business by any state) except the U.S. Postal Service; agencies of the United States, of any state, or of any political subdivision of a state; issuers, sellers, or redeemers of stored value, or any person that is a money services business solely because that person serves as an agent of another money services business (however, a money services business that engages in activities described in § 103.11(uu) both on its own behalf and as an agent for others is required to register).
3 Jurisdictions posing heightened risk include those that have been (1) identified by the Department of State as a sponsor of international terrorism under 22 USC 2371; (2) designated as non-cooperative with international anti-money laundering principles or procedures by an intergovernmental group or organization of which the United States is a member (such as the Financial Action Task Force, www.fatf-gafi.org) and with which designation the United States representative or organization concurs; or (3) designated by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5318A as warranting special measures due to money laundering concerns. See also note 7, infra.
4 In addition to violating the FinCEN registration regulation, which can result in both civil and criminal penalties, failure to register with FinCEN is a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1960. See U.S. v. Uddin, No. 04-CR-80192 (E.D.Mich. April 11, 2005). Under certain circumstances, failure to obtain a required state license to operate a money services business can also result in a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1960. See U.S. v. Velastegui, 199 F.3d 590 (2nd Cir. 1999).
5See 31 CFR 103.121 (FinCEN); 12 CFR 21.21 (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency); 12 CFR 208.63(b), 211.5(m), 211.24(j) (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System); 12 CFR 326.8(b) (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation); 12 CFR 563.177(b) (Office of Thrift Supervision); 12 CFR 748.2(b) (National Credit Union Administration).
6Supra, note 3.
7 While the operation of a money services business in either of these two areas does not itself require a banking organization to conclude that the money services business poses a high risk, it is a factor that may be relevant. Information concerning High Risk Money Laundering and Related Financial Crimes Areas can be found at  https://www.fincen.gov/HIFCA. Designations of High Risk Money Laundering and Related Financial Crimes Areas are made in the Treasury Department’s National Money Laundering Strategy reports. Information concerning High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas can be found at http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/hidta/.
8Supra, note 3.
9See U.S. v. Uddin, supra, note 4.
10 Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act, as implemented by 31 CFR 103.110, establishes a safe harbor from liability for a financial institution or association of financial institutions that voluntarily chooses to share information with other financial institutions for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting money laundering or terrorist activity. To avail itself of the 314(b) safe harbor, a financial institution must comply with the requirements of the implementing regulation, 31 CFR 103.110, including notice to FinCEN, verification that the other financial institution has submitted the requisite notice, and restrictions on the use and security of information shared. The safe harbor afforded by Section 314(b) is only available to financial institutions that are required to implement an anti-money laundering program, which includes banks regulated by a federal functional regulator (see 31 CFR 103.120) and money services businesses (see 31 CFR 103.125). For additional information on the 314(b) voluntary information sharing program, or to submit a notice to FinCEN to share information voluntarily, please refer to www.fincen.gov.
11See 31 CFR 103.41(b)(3).

Financial Institution

Depository Institutions
Money Services Businesses




Content


PDF

fincenadv04262005.pdf116.14 KB



Issued Date
April 26, 2005



Guidance Subject
GUIDANCE TO MONEY SERVICES BUSINESSES ON OBTAINING AND MAINTAINING BANKING SERVICES

This Advisory emphasizes the obligations of money services businesses under the Bank Secrecy Act, and outlines the information and documentation those businesses should have and be prepared to provide when seeking to open or maintain account relationships with banking organizations.
Background
In response to concerns by money services businesses and banking organizations alike, on March 30, 2005, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (“FinCEN”) and the Federal Banking Agencies1 issued a joint statement recognizing the importance of ensuring that money services businesses that comply with the law have reasonable access to banking services. The statement also confirmed that banking organizations should apply the Bank Secrecy Act requirements to money services businesses, as they do with all accountholders, on a risk-assessed basis.
As a follow-up to the joint statement, FinCEN and the Federal Banking Agencies are issuing joint guidance to banking organizations to clarify the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and to set forth the minimum steps that banking organizations should take when providing banking services to money services businesses. FinCEN is issuing this document concurrently to identify and explain to money services businesses the types of information and documentation they are expected to have and to provide to banking organizations.
Money Services Businesses Compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and Other Applicable Requirements FinCEN has defined money services businesses to include five distinct types of financial services providers and the U.S. Postal Service: (1) currency dealers or exchangers; (2) check cashers; (3) issuers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value; (4) sellers or redeemers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value; and (5) money transmitters. There is a threshold requirement for businesses in the first four categories – a business that engages in such transactions will not be considered a money services business if it does not engage in such transactions in an amount greater that $1,000 for any person on any day in one or more transactions. See 31 CFR 103.11(uu). Among other requirements, certain money services business principals are required to register with FinCEN.2 Additionally, many states require money services businesses to obtain a license.
Money services businesses provide valuable financial services, especially to individuals who may not have ready access to the formal banking sector. Like other financial institutions, money services businesses must take reasonable steps to guard against money laundering and the financing of terrorism by assessing the risks and vulnerabilities associated with their operations and understanding and complying with the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act and applicable state laws.3 It is critical that the money services business industry maintain the same level of transparency, including the implementation of the full range of anti-money laundering controls required by law, as do banking organizations.
The money services business industry has, as a whole, joined us in the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism by diligently implementing the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act as well as similar state-based requirements. Industry leaders have made compliance a top priority. Yet the money services business industry, and the range of products and services offered and customer bases served, are extremely diverse. Thus, over the past several years, we have devoted considerable resources to conduct aggressive outreach and education campaigns concerning Bank Secrecy Act requirements.4 Despite those efforts, some in the industry, particularly those that offer these services only as an ancillary component of their primary business, appear to be unfamiliar with or unaware of their obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act, even if they have been in business for some time.
Given the importance of compliance with the anti-money laundering requirements to the protection of our financial system and our national security, money services businesses that fail to comply with even the most basic requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act, such as registration with FinCEN if required, not only are subject to regulatory and law enforcement scrutiny, but also are likely to lose banking services that enable them to function. We will continue to work closely with the Internal Revenue Service and state regulators going forward to ensure compliance while at the same time providing all money services businesses with the necessary resources and support.
Obtaining Banking Services – Basic Information Concerning the Money Services Business and Account Activity Banking organizations have been instructed, at a minimum, to take the following steps when determining whether to open or maintain an account for a money services business:
Obtain basic identifying information about the money services business through the application of their Customer Identification Program;5
Confirm FinCEN registration, if required;
Confirm compliance with state or local licensing requirements, if applicable;
Confirm agent status, if applicable; and
Conduct basic risk assessment to determine the level of risk associated with the account to solicit additional information, as deemed necessary.
A money services business should be prepared to provide this information to its banking organization when seeking to open an account or when requested to do so by its banking organization for purposes of maintaining an existing account relationship. Registration with FinCEN, if required, and compliance with any state licensing requirements represent the most basic of compliance obligations for money services businesses; a money services business operating in contravention of registration or licensing requirements would be violating Federal and possibly state laws.6 As a result, banking organizations will require confirmation of a money services business’s registration and licensing status prior to opening an account.
The extent to which a banking organization will seek additional information from a money services business beyond the minimums outlined above will be dictated by the banking organization’s assessment of the level of risk posed by the individual customer. Care has been taken to remind the banking industry that not all money services businesses pose the same level of risk, and that not all money services businesses will always require additional due diligence. In some cases, the amount of additional customer due diligence performed by a banking organization will be negligible. In other situations, the additional due diligence performed will be extensive.
Like other financial institutions subject to the Bank Secrecy Act, money services businesses must assess the risks of their operations as a step in developing effective anti-money laundering programs. Money services businesses seeking to obtain or maintain account relationships with banking organizations should be prepared to provide information or explanation to their banking organizations about the risks associated with the services offered, the customer base, the markets served, and the locations of the money services business.
Such information may be very simple for many small money services businesses operating in local areas with limited products, in contrast with sophisticated, global money services businesses. Accordingly, money services businesses should be prepared to provide and explain to their banking organizations certain basic operational information:
• Types of products and services offered by the money services business A money services business should help its banking organization understand –
- the categories of services engaged in by the particular money service business;
- whether the money service business is a “principal” (with a fleet of agents) or an agent of another money services business;
- whether the money services business is new or an established operation; and - whether or not money services represent a primary or ancillary aspect of the business (such as a grocery store that derives a small fraction of its overall revenue from cashing checks).
• Location(s) and Market(s) served by the money services business A money services business should help its banking organization understand –
- the markets it targets; - the locations it serves; - whether it offers international services; and - whether it caters exclusively to local residents.
• Anticipated account activity A money services business should help its banking organization understand –
- the services the business intends to use, such as currency deposits or withdrawals, check deposits, or funds transfers; - the branch locations the business intends to use; - estimated transaction amounts; - any external or seasonal factors that may impact expected transactions.
• Purpose for the account
A money services business should be prepared to explain to its banking organization the purposes for which its accounts would be used. For example, a money transmitter might require a bank account to remit funds to its principal U.S. clearing account or may intend to use the account to remit funds cross-border to foreign-based agents.
Finally, banking organizations have been advised to take additional steps in circumstances where, based on the collection of the information described above, heightened risk has been identified. Once again, care has been taken to explain that these additional steps are not appropriate in all cases and should not be considered the standard to be applied to all money services business accounts. Money services businesses should nonetheless be prepared to provide additional information to banking organizations, including details into the operation of their business and their anti-money laundering program. Such additional information could include –
- The money services business’s anti-money laundering program;7 - The results of the money services business’s independent testing of its anti-money laundering program;8 - Review list of agents, including locations, within or outside the United States, that will be receiving services directly or indirectly through the money services business account; - Written procedures for the operation of the money services business; - Written agent management and termination practices for the money services business; or - Written employee screening practices for the money services business.
Given the diversity of the money services business industry, and the directive in our regulations to apply the requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act on a risk-assessed basis, the extent and content of information identified above will vary markedly.
314(b) Voluntary Information Sharing
Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 allows certain financial institutions, after providing notice to FinCEN, to voluntarily share information with each other for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting possible money laundering or terrorist financing under protection of legal safe harbor.9
Banks and money services businesses can utilize Section 314(b) information sharing to work together to identify money laundering and terrorist financing. While participation in the 314(b) information sharing program is voluntary, FinCEN encourages banking organizations and their money services business customers to consider how voluntary information sharing could enable each institution to more effectively discharge its anti-money laundering and suspicious activity monitoring obligation.
Additional Resources
FinCEN has made comprehensive resources available to money services businesses, free of charge, that provide information about compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and explain how money services businesses can prevent money laundering. FinCEN has established a web site, http://www.msb.gov/, dedicated to money services business regulations and guidance, such as FinCEN Rulings and answers to frequently asked questions. Free, easy-to-understand educational materials include:
“Quick Reference Guide to Bank Secrecy Act Requirements for Money Services Businesses;”
“Guide to Money Laundering Prevention;”
Posters and “Take One” cards, available in multiple languages and bi-lingual versions, to inform money services business customers about Bank Secrecy Act requirements and help customers understand why the business must ask for personal information; and
Videos and CD-ROMs, in English and Spanish, with case studies designed to educate money services business employees about the Bank Secrecy Act requirements.
Money services businesses can obtain these free educational materials by:
“Submitting an online order form through http://www.msb.gov/ (fastest option)
“Printing an order form from http://www.msb.gov/ and faxing to 1-800-773-8356 or mailing to:Money Services Business Program OfficeP.O. Box 39Vienna, VA 22183
Phoning an order to 1-800-386-6329
FinCEN Regulatory Helpline – 800-949-2732 – for questions concerning Bank Secrecy Act requirements. FinCEN Financial Institutions Hotline – 866-556-3974 – to report suspicious activity that may be related to terrorist financing or ongoing money laundering schemes. Money Transmitter Regulators Association (http://www.mtraweb.org) - the association of state regulators of the money transmitter industry.
1 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision.
 
2 See 31 CFR 103.41. The registration requirement applies to all money services businesses (whether or not licensed as a money services business by any state) except the U.S. Postal Service; agencies of the United States, of any state, or of any political subdivision of a state; issuers, sellers, or redeemers of stored value, or any person that is a money services business solely because that person serves as an agent of another money services business (however, a money services business that engages in activities described in § 103.11(uu) both on its own behalf and as an agent for others is required to register). 3 A comprehensive summary of the Bank Secrecy Act requirements applicable to money services businesses is located at http://www.msb.gov/.
4 Additional resources are provided for money services businesses at the end of this Advisory.
5 Banking organizations are required to implement a Customer Identification Program. See 31 CFR 103.121 (FinCEN); 12 CFR 21.21 (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency); 12 CFR 208.63(b), 211.5(m), 211.24(j) (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System); 12 CFR 326.8(b) (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation); 12 CFR 563.177(b) (Office of Thrift Supervision); 12 CFR 748.2(b) (National Credit Union Administration).
6 In addition to violating the FinCEN registration regulation, which can result in both civil and criminal penalties, failure to register with FinCEN is a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1960. See U.S. v. Uddin, No. 04-CR-80192 (E.D.Mich. April 11, 2005). Under certain circumstances, failure to obtain a required state license to operate a money services business can also result in a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1960. See U.S. v. Velastegui, 199 F.3d 590 (2nd Cir. 1999).
7 FinCEN’s regulations require money services businesses to establish anti-money laundering programs tailored to their operations and the risks posed. 31 CFR 103.125. For example, the anti-money laundering program of a small money services business involved solely in the transmission of funds in small amounts will differ dramatically from the global money services business with both domestic and foreign agents.
8 FinCEN’s regulations do not require money services businesses to retain outside auditors to conduct the independent test of an anti-money laundering program. 31 CFR 103.125; 67 Fed. Reg. 21114 (Apr. 29, 2002) at 21115. This is especially important for small money services businesses that may not have the ability to retain an outside auditing firm.
9 Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act, as implemented by 31 CFR 103.110, establishes a safe harbor from liability for a financial institution or association of financial institutions that voluntarily chooses to share information with other financial institutions for the purpose of identifying and, where appropriate, reporting money laundering or terrorist activity. To avail itself of the 314(b) safe harbor, a financial institution must comply with the requirements of the implementing regulation, 31 CFR 103.110, including notice to FinCEN, verification that the other financial institution has submitted the requisite notice, and restrictions on the use and security of information shared. The safe harbor afforded by Section 314(b) is only available to financial institutions that are required to implement an anti-money laundering program, which includes banks regulated by a federal functional regulator (see 31 CFR 103.120) and money services businesses (see 31 CFR 103.125). For additional information on the 314(b) voluntary information sharing program, or to submit a notice to FinCEN to share information voluntarily, please refer to https://www.fincen.gov/.

Financial Institution

Depository Institutions
Money Services Businesses




Content


PDF

faqsfinalciprule.pdf88.02 KB



Issued Date
April 28, 2005



Guidance Subject
Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act

FAQs: Final CIP Rule
The staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Thrift Supervision, and the United States Department of the Treasury (“Agencies”) are issuing these frequently asked questions (“FAQs”) regarding the application of 31 C.F.R. § 103.121. This joint regulation implements section 3261 of the USA PATRIOT Act and requires banks, savings associations, credit unions and certain non-federally regulated banks (“bank”) to have a Customer Identification Program (“CIP”).
While the purpose of the FAQs document is to provide interpretive guidance with respect to the CIP rule, the Agencies recognize that this document does not answer every question that may arise in connection with the rule.The Agencies encourage banks to use the basic principles set forth in the CIP rule, as articulated in these answers, to address variations on these questions that may arise, and expect banks to design their own programs in accordance with the nature of their business.
The Agencies wish to emphasize that a bank’s CIP must include risk-based procedures for verifying the identity of each customer to the extent reasonable and practicable. It is critical that each bank develop procedures to account for all relevant risks including those presented by the types of accounts maintained by the bank, the various methods of opening accounts provided, the type of identifying information available, and the bank’s size, location, and type of business or customer base. Thus, specific minimum requirements in the rule, such as the four basic types of information to be obtained from each customer, should be supplemented by risk-based verification procedures, where appropriate, to ensure that the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows each customer’s identity.
The Agencies note that the CIP, while important, is only one part of a bank’s BSA/AML compliance program. Adequate implementation of a CIP, standing alone, will not be sufficient to meet a bank’s other obligations under the BSA, regulations promulgated by its primary Federal regulator, such as Suspicious Activity Reporting requirements, or regulations promulgated by the Office of Foreign Assets Control.
Finally, these FAQs have been designed to help banks comply with the requirements of the CIP rule. They do not address the applicability of any other Federal or state laws.
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(1) -- Definition of “account”
1. The CIP rule applies to a “customer,” which is generally “a person that opens a new account.” (Emphasis added.) At what point does the CIP rule apply when the account is a loan? When is the account opened? whose loan application is denied. See 68 FR 25090, 25093 (May 9, 2003). Therefore, when the account is a loan, the account is opened when the bank enters into an enforceable agreement to provide a loan to the customer. (January 2004)
2. Are loan participations purchased from third parties and loans purchased from a car dealer or mortgage broker within the exclusion from the definition of “account” for loans acquired through an acquisition, merger, purchase of assets, or assumption of liabilities? Yes, this exclusion is intended to cover loan participations purchased from third parties and loans purchased from a car dealer or mortgage broker. If, however, the bank is extending credit to the borrower using a car dealer or mortgage broker as its agent, then it must ensure that the dealer or broker is performing the bank’s CIP. (January 2004)
3. Are data processing, data warehousing, and data transmission on behalf of a person an “account?” “Account” is defined to mean “a formal banking relationship established to provide or engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions including a deposit account, a transaction or asset account, a credit account, or other extension of credit. Account also includes a relationship established to provide a safety deposit box or other safekeeping services, or cash management, custodian and trust services.” The examples provided in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(1) of formal banking relationships included within the meaning of “account” focus on bank products and services that relate to the deposit, lending or custody of funds or other assets on behalf of a customer. Data processing, warehousing, and transmission services generally do not involve a service, dealing, or financial transaction that, taken alone, constitutes a “formal banking relationship” within the meaning of 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(1). If, however, any of these services are part of the establishment of a formal banking relationship, then the CIP rule in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121 would apply. (April 2005)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(2) -- Definition of “bank”
1. Is the CIP rule applicable to a bank’s foreign subsidiaries? No. The CIP rule does not apply to any part of the bank located outside of the United States. Nevertheless, as a matter of safety and soundness, banks are encouraged to implement an effective CIP throughout their operations, including in their foreign offices, except to the extent that the requirements of the rule would conflict with local law. (January 2004)
2. Is the CIP rule applicable to bank holding companies and their non-bank subsidiaries, or to savings and loan holding companies and their non-savings association subsidiaries? No, the CIP rule in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121 applies only to a “bank.” A bank holding company is not subject to the rule solely because it owns a bank. However, a bank holding company may be subject to another CIP rule. For example, if the company is a broker-dealer in securities, it would be subject to 31 C.F.R. §103.122. Similarly, a non-bank subsidiary of a bank holding company is not subject to the CIP rule for banks solely as a result of being affiliated with a bank in a holding company structure. However, a non-bank subsidiary may be subject to one of the other CIP rules. Even if a bank holding company is not itself subject to the CIP rule under 31 C.F.R. § 103.121, it should, as a matter of safety and soundness, take appropriate measures throughout its organization to ensure that each entity is in compliance with any applicable CIP rule, to ensure that new accounts receive appropriate due diligence, and generally to protect the consolidated organization from risks associated with money laundering and financial crime. The analysis set forth above is equally applicable to savings and loan holding companies and their non-savings association subsidiaries. (April 2005)
3. Should subsidiaries of a bank implement a customer identification program? Yes. The Federal banking agencies take the position that implementation of customer identification programs by subsidiaries of banks is appropriate as a matter of safety and soundness and protection from reputational risks. Subsidiaries (other than functionally regulated subsidiaries) of banks should comply with the customer identification program rule that applies to the parent bank when opening an account within the meaning of 31 C.F.R. § 103.121. In addition, a number of the Federal banking agencies have separately issued rules that require certain subsidiaries of banks to conduct their activities pursuant to the same terms and conditions that apply to the conduct of such activities by the parent bank. See, e.g., 12 C.F.R. § 5.34 (OCC); 12 C.F.R. § 559.3(h) (OTS). Some functionally regulated subsidiaries of banks are already subject to a customer identification program rule issued jointly by their functional regulator and FinCEN (i.e., 31 C.F.R. § 103.122 (broker-dealers); 31 C.F.R. § 103.131 (mutual funds); and 31 C.F.R. § 103.123 (futures commission merchants and introducing brokers)). For purposes of the requirements imposed under section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act, functionally regulated subsidiaries are: broker-dealers, investment companies, investment advisers registered with the SEC, persons licensed to provide insurance, and any entity with respect to a financial activity that is subject to the jurisdiction of the CFTC (such as futures commission merchants, introducing brokers, commodity trading advisors, commodity pools, and commodity pool operators). See 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l)(4); 15 U.S.C. §§ 6805, 6809. Subsidiaries of banks that are functionally regulated by the SEC or the CFTC are required to comply with the applicable CIP rules issued by the SEC or CFTC, respectively, and FinCEN. The Federal banking agencies, SEC, CFTC, Department of the Treasury, and FinCEN have worked together to create uniform rules that minimize potential conflicts or differences between the agencies’ rules. In addition, Treasury and FinCEN intend to issue customer identification program rules applicable to other types of financial institutions in the future. (April 2005)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3) -- Definition of “customer”
1. Who is the “customer” when an account is opened by an individual who has power-of- attorney for a competent person who is the named owner of the account? The CIP rule provides that a “customer” generally is “a person that opens a new account.” 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(i)(A). When an account is opened by an individual who has power-of-attorney for a competent person, the individual with a power-of-attorney is merely an agent acting on behalf of the person that opens the account. Therefore, the “customer” will be the named owner of the account rather than the individual with a power-of-attorney over the account. By contrast, an individual with power-of-attorney will be the “customer” if the account is opened for a person who lacks legal capacity. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(i)(B)(1). (January 2004)
2. Is a person who becomes co-owner of an existing deposit account a “customer” to whom the CIP rule applies? Yes, a person who becomes the co-owner of an existing deposit account is a “customer” subject to the CIP rule because that person is establishing a new account relationship with the bank. (January 2004)
3. Is a new borrower who is substituted for an existing borrower through an assumption of a loan a “customer” to whom the CIP rule applies? Yes, a new borrower who is substituted for an existing borrower through an assumption of a loan is a “customer” because the new borrower is establishing a new account relationship with the bank. (January 2004)
4. The CIP rule requires a bank to verify the identity of each “customer.” Under the CIP rule, a “customer” generally is defined as “a person that opens a new account.” If a pension plan administrator chooses to remove a former employee from the plan pursuant to section 657(c) of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA), it is required by law to transfer these funds to a financial institution. In addition, an administrator of a terminated plan may remove former employees that it is unable to locate, by transferring their benefits to a financial institution. Would a plan administrator or the former employee be a bank “customer” where funds are transferred to a bank and an account established in the name of the former employee, in either of these situations?
In either situation, the administrator has no ownership interest in or other right to the funds, and therefore, is not the bank’s “customer.” Nor would we view the administrator as acting as the customer’s agent when the administrator transfers the funds of former employees in these situations. A customer relationship arises and the requirements of the rule are implicated when the former employee “opens” an account. While the former employee has a legally enforceable right to the funds that are transferred to the bank, the employee has not exercised that right until he or she contacts the bank to assert an ownership interest. Thus, in light of the requirements imposed on the plan administrator under EGTRRA, as well as the requirements in connection with plan terminations, the former employee will not be deemed to have “opened a new account” for purposes of the CIP rule until he or she contacts the bank to assert an ownership interest over the funds, at which time a bank will be required to implement its CIP with respect to the former employee. This interpretation applies only to (1) transfers of funds as required under section 657(c) of EGTRRA, and (2) transfers to banks by administrators of terminated plans in the name of participants that they have been unable to locate, or who have been notified of termination but have not responded, and should not be construed to apply to any other transfer of funds that may constitute opening an account. (January 2004)
5. A bank is an agent for a (bank) credit card issuer. The cards are co-branded, the two banks share in the revenue from the cards issued. However, the issuer approves the credit card applications and handles collections. Is a person who obtains a credit card a customer of the agent bank or the card issuer? A person who receives a credit card is receiving an extension of credit from, and therefore is establishing an account with, the issuing bank. The agent bank is compensated by the issuing bank and not by the customer. For these reasons, the issuing bank is responsible for ensuring that its CIP applies to the customer. However, the agent bank may perform parts of the CIP on behalf of the issuing bank. As with any other responsibility performed by an agent, the issuing bank ultimately is responsible for the agent’s compliance with the requirements of the CIP rule. See 68 FR 25090, 25104 (May 9, 2003). Alternatively, the issuing bank may rely upon the agent bank to perform elements of its CIP, provided that the issuing bank is able to satisfy the requirements of the reliance provision, 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(6), including the requirement that the person be a customer of both the issuing and agent bank. (January 2004)
6. Does the CIP rule prohibit a minor from opening an account? No, the CIP rule does not bar a minor from opening an account. It merely states that the bank’s “customer” is the individual who opens the account for an individual who lacks legal capacity, such as a minor. In other words, if a parent opens an account for a minor, the bank’s customer is the parent. If, however, a minor opens the account, then the minor is the bank’s customer. For example, where a bank sends its employees to elementary schools so that students may open savings accounts as part of a program to promote financial literacy, a student opening an account is the bank’s customer. In this situation, as for all customers, the bank should get the name, address, date of birth, and taxpayer identification number of the student. Since verification procedures are risk-based, banks can use any reasonable documentary or non-documentary method to verify a student’s identity. In this case, the bank might verify a student’s identity using a student identification card or by having the student’s teacher confirm the student’s identity. (April 2005)
7. The definition of “account” excludes accounts opened for the purpose of participating in an employee benefit plan established under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). In the case of a trust, custodial, or other administrative account established by an employer at a bank to maintain and administer assets under a non-ERISA employee retirement, benefit, or deferred compensation plan, who is the bank's "customer?" Is a participant in or beneficiary of such an account the “customer?” In the case of these accounts (including, for example, accounts established by governmental entities to administer retirement or benefit plans or by employers to administer stock option or restricted stock plans) that are established as trusts, the bank’s “customer” will be the trust established by the employer to maintain the assets. If the account is not a trust, the bank’s “customer” will be the employer that contracts with the bank to establish the account.* Based on the bank's risk assessment of any new account opened by a customer that is not an individual, the bank may need "to obtain information about" individuals with authority or control over such an account, including signatories, in order to verify the customer's identity. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii)(C). For purposes of the CIP rule, a participant in or beneficiary of such an account will not be deemed to be the bank’s “customer,” as such a person will not have initiated the relationship with the bank. The account will not be considered opened by the employee even if a subaccount is maintained in the employee’s name, or the employee is able to make deposits into the account, so long as such ability to make deposits is limited to rolling over assets from another plan, purchasing securities or exercising options to purchase securities issued by the employer, or repaying a loan, in accordance with the terms of the plan. By contrast, where an individual opens an individual retirement account in a bank, the individual who opens the account is the bank's "customer." (April 2005) * Note, however, that the CIP rule will not apply if the employer is exempt from the definition of “customer” under 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(ii).
8. Does the definition of "customer" include the relationship with an investor that is established when a bank acts as a registered transfer agent for an issuer, for example, when it effects transactions for the investor in the securities of an issuer as part of the issuer's dividend reinvestment plan or as part of the plan or program for the purchase or sale of that issuer's shares in a manner that does not cause the bank to be a broker under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934? No. A bank that is a registered transfer agent is acting as agent of the issuer of securities. The relationship with the investor does not constitute a “formal banking relationship established to engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions” with the investor in these situations. Thus, the bank’s relationship with the investor does not constitute a “customer” relationship. With respect to a bank acting as a transfer agent for its own securities, such bank is dealing with shareholders as shareholders and not as customers. (April 2005)
9. Who is the “customer” for purposes of trust accounts? Does it make a difference whether the bank or a third party is trustee for the trust? In the case of a trust account, the “customer” is the trust whether or not the bank is the trustee for the trust. “A bank will not be required to look through trust, escrow, or similar accounts to verify the identities of beneficiaries and instead will only be required to verify the identity of the named accountholder.” See 68 FR 25090, 25094 (May 9, 2003). However, the CIP rule also provides that, based on the bank’s risk assessment of a new account opened by a customer that is not an individual, the bank may need “to obtain information about” individuals with authority or control over such an account, including signatories, in order to verify the customer’s identity. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii)(C). For example, in certain circumstances involving revocable trusts, the bank may need to gather information about the settlor, grantor, trustee, or other persons with the authority to direct the trustee, and who thus have authority or control over the account, in order to establish the true identity of the customer. (April 2005)
10. Who is the “customer” for purposes of escrow accounts? An escrow account is an account generally established for the deposit of funds that are to be paid to a specified party on the fulfillment of escrow conditions or returned. If a bank establishes an account in the name of a third party, such as a real estate agent, who is acting as escrow agent, then the bank’s customer will be the escrow agent. If the bank is the escrow agent, then the person who establishes the account is the bank’s “customer.” For example, if the purchaser of real estate directly opens an escrow account and deposits funds to be paid to the seller upon satisfaction of specified conditions, the bank’s customer will be the purchaser. Further, if a company in formation establishes an escrow account for investors to deposit their subscriptions pending receipt of a required minimum amount, the bank’s customer will be the company in formation (or if not yet a legal entity, the person opening the account on its behalf). “A bank will not be required to look through trust, escrow, or similar accounts to verify the identities of beneficiaries and instead will only be required to verify the identity of the named accountholder.” See 68 FR 25090, 25094 (May 9, 2003). However, the CIP rule also provides that, based on the bank’s risk assessment of a new account opened by a customer that is not an individual, the bank may need “to obtain information about” individuals with authority or control over such an account, including signatories, in order to verify the customer’s identity. See 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii)(C). (April 2005)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(ii)(C) – Person with an existing account
1. A loan and a time deposit are each an “account” for purposes of the CIP rule. How do the requirements of the CIP rule apply to a loan that is renewed, or a certificate of deposit that is rolled over? The CIP rule applies to a “customer,” generally, “a person that opens a new account.” 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(i). (Emphasis added.) “Account” means a formal banking relationship established to provide or engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions including a deposit account, a transaction or asset account, a credit account, or other extension of credit. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(1)(i). For purposes of the CIP rule, each time a loan is renewed or a certificate of deposit is rolled over, the bank establishes another formal banking relationship and a new account is established. However, the rule provides that the term “customer” does not include a person that has an existing account with the bank, provided that the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the person. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(ii)(C). In each of these cases, the customer has an existing account. Therefore, as long as the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows the person’s true identity, the bank need not perform its CIP when a loan is renewed or certificate of deposit is rolled over. However, if a new customer is added to the loan or deposit account, the bank would need to satisfy the CIP rule with respect to that new account relationship. (January 2004)
2. Does the exclusion from the definition of “customer” in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(ii)(C) for a person with an existing account extend to a person who has had an account with the bank in the last twelve months but who no longer has an account? No, this provision only excludes from the definition of “customer” a person that at the time a new account is opened currently “has an existing account with the bank,” and only if the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the person. Therefore, for example, when a person has a deposit account and subsequently obtains a loan, the person has an existing account with the bank. Conversely, a person would not be deemed to have an existing account at the bank if the person had a loan, paid it off, and twelve months later obtains a new loan. (January 2004)
3. How can a bank demonstrate that it has “a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of a person with an existing account” with respect to persons that had accounts with the bank as of October 1, 2003? Among the ways a bank can demonstrate that it has “a reasonable belief” is by showing that prior to the issuance of the final CIP rule, it had comparable procedures in place to verify the identity of persons that had accounts with the bank as of October 1, 2003, though the bank may not have gathered the very same information about such persons as required by the final CIP rule. Alternative means include showing that the bank has had an active and longstanding relationship with a particular person, evidenced by such things as a history of account statements sent to the person, information sent to the IRS about the person’s accounts without issue, loans made and repaid, or other services performed for the person over a period of time. This alternative, however, may not suffice for persons that the bank has deemed to be high risk. (January 2004)
4. Can a bank exclude from the definition of “customer” a person that has an existing account with its affiliate? No, a person that has an existing account with a bank affiliate does not qualify as “a person who has an existing account with the bank” within the meaning of 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(a)(3)(ii)(C). However, the bank may be able to rely on its affiliate to perform elements of its CIP, as provided in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(6). (January 2004)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(i) -- Information required
1. What address should be obtained for customers who live in rural areas who do not have a residential or business address or the residential or business address of next of kin or another contact individual? For example, is a rural route number acceptable? Yes, the number on the roadside mailbox on a rural route is acceptable as an address. A rural route number, unlike a post office box number, is a description of the approximate area where the customer can be located. In the absence of such a number, and in the absence of a residential or business address for next of kin or another contact individual, a description of the customer’s physical location will suffice. (January 2004)
2. Can a bank open an account for a U.S. person that does not have a taxpayer identification number? No, the bank cannot unless the customer has applied for a taxpayer identification number, the bank confirms that the application was filed before the customer opened the account, and the bank obtains the taxpayer identification number within a reasonable period of time after the account is opened. Note, however, that a bank does not need to obtain a taxpayer identification number when opening a new account for a customer that has an existing account, as long as the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the customer. A bank may also open an account for a person who lacks legal capacity with the identifying information, including taxpayer identification number, of an individual who opens an account for that person. (January 2004)
3. The CIP rule requires a bank to obtain a taxpayer identification number from the customer prior to opening an account from a customer that is a U.S. person. When the bank’s customer is a trust, what taxpayer identification number should the bank obtain? The taxpayer identification number for a trust is the trust’s employer identification number (EIN). If the trust is not required to have an EIN under the tax laws, then the bank may obtain the grantor’s taxpayer identification number, consistent with section 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder. (April 2005)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii) -- Customer verification
1. Must a bank verify the accuracy of all of the identifying information it collects in connection with 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(i)? The final rule provides that a bank’s CIP must contain procedures for verifying the identity of the customer, “using the information obtained in accordance with paragraph (b)(2)(i),” namely the identifying information obtained by the bank. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii). A bank need not establish the accuracy of every element of identifying information obtained but must do so for enough information to form a reasonable belief it knows the true identity of the customer. See 68 FR 25090, 25099 (May 9, 2003). (January 2004)
2. Can a bank use an employee identification card as the sole means to verify a customer’s identity? A bank using documentary methods to verify a customer’s identity must have procedures that set forth the documents that the bank will use. The CIP rule gives examples of types of documents that have long been considered primary sources of identification and reflects the Agencies’ expectation that banks will obtain government-issued identification from most customers. However, other forms of identification may be used if they enable the bank to form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the customer. Nonetheless, given the availability of counterfeit and fraudulently obtained documents, a bank is encouraged to obtain more than a single document to ensure that it has a reasonable belief that it knows the customer’s true identity. (January 2004)
3. Can a bank use an electronic credential, such as a digital certificate, as a non-documentary means to verify the identity of a customer that opens an account over the Internet or through some other purely electronic channel? A bank may obtain an electronic credential, such as a digital certificate, as one of the methods it uses to verify a customer’s identity. However, the CIP rule requires the bank to have a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the customer. Therefore, for example, the bank is responsible for ensuring that the third party uses the same level of authentication as the bank itself would use. See also FFIEC guidance titled “Authentication in an Electronic Banking Environment” (July 30, 2001). (January 2004)
4. How should a bank verify the identity of a partnership that opens a new account when there are no documents or non-documentary methods that will establish the identity of the partnership? A bank opening an account for such a partnership must undertake additional verification by obtaining information about the identity of any individual with authority or control over the partnership account, in order to verify the partnership’s identity, as described in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii)(C). (January 2004)
5. How should a bank verify the identity of a sole proprietorship that opens a new account, (such as an account titled in the name of an individual “doing business as” a sole proprietorship) when there are no documents or non-documentary methods that will establish the identity of the sole proprietorship? In some states, sole proprietorships are required to file “fictitious” or “assumed name certificates.” Banks may choose to use these certificates as a means to verify the identity of a sole proprietorship, if appropriate. However, when there are no documents or non-documentary methods that will establish the identity of the sole proprietorship, the bank must undertake additional verification by obtaining information about the sole proprietor or any other individual with authority or control over the sole proprietorship account -- such as the name, address, date of birth, and taxpayer identification number of the sole proprietor, or any other individual with authority or control over the account -- in order to verify the sole proprietorship’s identity, as described in 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(ii)(C). (January 2004)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(i) – Required records
1. Would it be acceptable to retain a description of the non-documentary customer verification method used (such as a consumer credit report or an inquiry to a fraud detection system) in a general policy or procedure instead of recording the fact that a particular method was used on each individual customer's record? Yes, provided that the record cross-references the specific provision(s) of the risk-based procedures contained in the bank’s CIP used to verify the customer’s identity. (January 2004)
2. Can a bank keep copies of documents provided to verify a customer’s identity, in addition to the description required under 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(i)(B), even if it is not required to do so? Yes, a bank may keep copies of identifying documents that it uses to verify a customer’s identity. A bank’s verification procedures should be risk-based and, in certain situations, keeping copies of identifying documents may be warranted. In addition, a bank may have procedures to keep copies of documents for other purposes, for example, to facilitate investigating potential fraud. (These documents should be retained in accordance with the general recordkeeping requirements in 31 C.F.R. § 103.38.) Nonetheless, a bank should be mindful that it must not improperly use any document containing a picture of an individual, such as a driver’s license, in connection with any aspect of a credit transaction. (January 2004)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(ii) – Retention of records
1. Does the original information obtained during account opening have to be retained or can the bank satisfy the recordkeeping requirement by just keeping updated information about the customer, i.e., the customer’s current address? The CIP rule requires that a bank retain the identifying information obtained about the customer at the time of account opening for five years after the date the account is closed or, in the case of credit card accounts, five years after the account is closed or becomes dormant. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(ii). Updated information serves valuable, but different, purposes. (January 2004)
2. If the bank requires a customer to provide more identifying information than the minimum during the account opening process, does it have to keep this information for more than five years? The bank must keep for five years after the account is closed, or in the case of credit card accounts, five years after the account is closed or becomes dormant, all identifying information it gathers about the customer to satisfy the requirements of § 103.121(b)(2)(i) of the CIP rule. 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(ii). This would include any identifying information, the bank will use, at the time the account is opened, to establish a reasonable belief it knows the true identity of the customer. So, for example, if the bank obtains other identifying information at account opening in addition to the minimal information required, such as the customer's phone number, then the bank must keep that information. (January 2004)
3. How does the record retention period apply to a customer who simultaneously opens multiple accounts in the bank? If several accounts are opened for a customer simultaneously, all identifying information about a customer obtained under 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(2)(i) must be retained for five years after the last account is closed or, in the case of credit card accounts, five years after the last account is closed or becomes dormant. All remaining records must be kept for five years after the records are made. (January 2004)
4. How does the record retention period apply to a situation where a bank sells a loan but retains the servicing rights to the loan? When a bank sells a loan, the account is “closed” under the record retention provision (31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(ii)), regardless of whether the bank retains the servicing rights to the loan. Thus, a bank should keep the records of identifying information about a customer for five years after the date that the loan is sold, as required by 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(i)(A). Any other record required by 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(3)(i) must be kept for five years after the record is made. (April 2005)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(4) -- Section 326 List
1. Has a list of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations been designated for purposes of the CIP rule? No such list has been designated to date. Banks will be contacted by their functional regulators when a list is issued. As of the time of publication, lists published by OFAC have not been designated as lists for purposes of the CIP rule. Of course, banks are separately obligated to check these lists in accordance with OFAC’s regulations. (January 2004)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(5) -- Customer notice
1. Does a bank have to provide notice to all owners of a joint account? Yes, notice must be provided to all owners of a joint account. In addition, notice must be provided “in a manner reasonably designed to ensure that a customer is able to view the notice, or is otherwise given notice, before opening an account.” 31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(5)(ii). The Agencies agree that a bank may satisfy this requirement by directly providing the notice to any one accountholder of a joint account for delivery to the other owners of the account. Similarly, the bank may open a joint account using information about each of the accountholders obtained from one accountholder, acting on behalf of the other joint accountholders. (January 2004)
2. How should a bank provide notice to its customer when it engages in indirect lending through a third party such as a mortgage broker or car dealer? When a mortgage broker or car dealer is acting as the bank's agent in connection with a loan, the bank may delegate to its agent the obligation to perform the requirements of the bank’s CIP rule. In contrast to the reliance provision in the CIP rule, the bank is ultimately responsible for its agent’s compliance with the rule. Depending upon the manner in which the account is opened, the agent can provide notice to the bank’s customer, for example, by posting a sign, printing the notice on the loan application given to the customer, orally providing the notice, or by providing the notice in any manner that is reasonably designed to ensure that the customer is given notice before opening an account. (January 2004)
31 C.F.R. § 103.121(b)(6) -- Reliance
1. Where a bank is entitled to “rely” on another financial institution to perform its CIP, whose CIP must the relied-upon financial institution implement? The reliance provision does not impose on the other financial institution the obligation to duplicate the procedures in the bank’s CIP. The reliance provision permits a bank to rely on another financial institution to perform any of the procedures of the bank’s CIP, meaning, any of the elements that the CIP rule requires to be in a bank’s CIP: (1) identity verification procedures, which include collecting the required information from customers and using some or all of that information to verify the customers’ identities; (2) keeping records related to the CIP; (3) determining whether a customer appears on a designated list of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations; and (4) providing customers with adequate notice that information is being requested to verify their identities. Note that a bank can only use the reliance provision when the other financial institution is regulated by a Federal functional regulator and is subject to a general BSA compliance program rule, they share the customer, the bank can show its reliance upon the other financial institution’s performance of an element of the bank’s CIP was reasonable under the circumstances, and the requisite contract is signed and certifications provided. (January 2004)
2. When a longstanding customer of another financial institution (including an affiliate) opens a new account at the bank, can a bank rely on the other financial institution’s verification of the identity of the customer performed before a CIP procedure was required? A bank that is subject to the CIP rule may rely on another financial institution’s verification of the identity of the customer if the requirements of the reliance provision are satisfied. The bank would have to be able to demonstrate that such reliance upon the other financial institution’s verification of the identity of the customer is reasonable under the circumstances. For example, the bank could do so by reviewing the relied-upon institution’s procedures to ensure that they were adequate although the institution was not yet subject to a CIP rule when it verified the customer’s identity. In addition, even when a bank is relying on the verification of identity performed by another institution, the bank would continue to be responsible for complying with all remaining requirements of the CIP rule, namely, the requirement that it keep records, provide customer notice, and as soon as a section 326 list has been designated, check the list when a new account is opened. (January 2004)
1 Section 326 of the Act adds a new subsection (l) to 31 U.S.C. § 5318 of the Bank Secrecy Act (“BSA”).

Financial Institution

Depository Institutions




Content
Content
